Articles for doctrine & preachinge. FIrste, that all they whiche shalbe admitted to preache, shalbee diligentlye examined for theire conformity in vnity of doctrine, established by publique authoritye: and admonished to vse sobriety and discretion in teachinge the people, namely in matters of controuersy: and to consider the grauity of their office, and to foresee with diligence the matters which they will speake, to vtter them to the edification of the Audience. Item, that they sette owte in theire preachinge the reuerent estimation of the holye Sacramentes of Baptisme and the Lordes supper, excitinge the people to thoften and deuoute receauing of the holy Communion of the body and bludde of Christe, in suche forme as is already prescribed in the booke of Common prayer: and as it is further declared in an Homily concerninge the vertue and efficacye of the sayde Sacramentes. Item, that they moue the people to all obedience, aswell in obseruation of the orders appoynted in the booke of Common seruice, as in the Queenes Maiesties Iniunctions, as also of all other ciuill duetyes due for subiectes to doe. Item, that al licences for preaching, graunted out by ye Archebysshop & Bysshopes wtin the prouince of Canterbury, bearing date before the first day of   marche 1564 be voyde and of none effect, and neuerthelesse all suche as shalbe thought meete for the office, to be admitted agayne without difficultye or charge, payinge no more but iiij. pens for the writing, parchement and waxe. Item, yf any Preacher or parson, vicar or curate so licensed, shall fortune to preache anye matter tendinge to dissention, or to the derogation of the religion and doctrine receyued, that the hearers denounce the same to the Ordinaryes, or the next Bisshoppe of the same place: but no man openly to contrary or to impugne the same speache so disorderly vttered: wherby may growe offence and disquiet of the people, but shalbe conuinced and reproued by the Ordinary after suche agreable order, as shall be seene to him according to the grauity of the offence. And that it bee presented within one moneth after the wordes spoken. Item, that they vse not to exact or receaue vnreasonable rewardes or stipendes of the poore Pastors, comminge to theyre Cures to preache, wherbye they myght bee noted as folowers of filthye lucre, rather then vse thoffice of preaching of Charitye and good zeale, to the saluation of mens soules. Item, if the Parson be able, he shall preache in his own person euery thre moneths, or els shall preache by an other, so that his absence be approued by the Ordinary of ye dioces in respecte of sickenes, seruice   or studye at the Vniuersities. Neuerthelesse yet for wante of able Preachers and Parsons, to tolerate them without penaltye, so that they preache in theyre owne persons, or by a learned substitute, once in euery three monethes of the yeare. Articles for administration of prayer and Sacramentes. FIrst, that the Common prayer be saide or songe decently and distinctly, in suche place as the Ordinary shall thinke meete for the largenesse and streightnesse of the Churche and quire, so that the people may be moste edified. Item, that no Parson or curate, not admitted by the bysshoppe of the dioces to preache, do expounde in his owne Cure or other where, any scripture or matter of doctrine or by the waye of exhortation, but onely study to reade grauelye and aptlye, without any glosinge of the same, or any additions, the homilyes already sette owte, or other suche necessary doctrine as is, or shalbe prescribed for the quyet instruction and edification of the people. Item, that in Cathedrall churches & colledges the holy Communion be ministred vpon the first or seconde sonday of euerye moneth at the leaste. So that both Deane, prebendaries, preistes & clerkes, do receyue: and all other of discretion of the fundation, do receaue foure tymes in the yeare at the least. Item, in the ministration of the holy Communion in Cathedrall and Collegiat Churches, ye principall minister shal vse a Cope, with Gospeller and Epistoler agreeably: and at all other prayers to be sayde at that Communion table, to vse no Copes but Surplesses. Item, that the Deane and Prebendaries weare a Surplesse with a silke Hoode in the Quyer: and when they preache in the Cathedrall or Collegiate churche, to weare theyre Hoode. Item, that euery Minister sayinge any publique prayers, or ministringe the Sacramentes, or other rites of the churche, shall weare a comely Surples with sleeues, to bee prouided at the charges of the Parishe: and that the Parishe prouide a decente table standinge on a frame, for the Communion table. Item, they shal decentlie couer with Carpet, silke or other decente coueringe, and with a fayre lynnen clothe (at the tyme of the ministration) the Communyon table: and to sett the tenne Commaundementes vppon the East walle ouer the said table. Item, that al communica¯tes do receaue kneeling  and as is appointed by the lawes of the Realme, and the Queenes maiestyes Iniunctions. Item, that the fonte be not remoued, nor that the Curate do baptise in parishe Churches in any Basons, nor in anye other forme then is alredie prescribed,   without charginge the parent to be present or absent at the Christening of his childe, although the parent may bee present or absent, but not to answere as Godfather for his childe. Item, that no childe bee admitted to answere as Godfather or godmother, except the childe hath receaued the Communion. Item, that there be none other holidayes obserued besides the Sundayes, but onely suche as be set out for holidayes, as in the Statute  Anno quinto & sexto Edwardi sexti,  & in the new kalender authorysed by the Queenes maiesty. Item, that when any Christian bodye is in passing, that the bell be tolled, and that the Curate be specially called for to comforte the sicke person: and after the tyme of his passinge, to ringe no more but one shorte peale: and one before the buriall, and an other shorte peale after the buriall. Item, that on Sundaies there be no shoppes open, nor artificers commonlye goinge aboute theire affaires worldly. And that in all Faires and common markets, sallinge vppon the sunday, there be no shewing of any wares before the Seruice be done. Item, that in the Rogation dayes of procession, they singe or saye in Englishe the twoo Psalmes beginninge,  Benedic anima mea. &c.  with the Letanye and Suffrages there vnto, with one Homelye of thankes geuinge to God, already deuised and diuided into foure partes, without addition of any superstitiouse ceremonyes heretofore vsed. Articles for certayne orders in ecclesiasticall policy. FIrst, againste the day of giuing of orders appoynted, the Bysshoppe shall geue open monitions to all men, to except agaynste suche as they knowe not to be worthy, either for life or conuersation. And there to giue notice that none shall sewe for orders, but within theire owne Dioces where they weare borne, or had theire longe tyme of dwellinge, except suche, as shall bee of degree in the Vniuersities. Item, that younge Preistes or Ministers, made or to be made, be so instructed, that they bee able to make apte aunsweres is concerninge the forme of the Catechisme prescribed. Item, that no Curate or Minister bee permitted to serue without examination and admission of ye Ordinary or his deputy, in writing, hauing respect, to the greatnes of the Cure, and the meetenes of the party: and that the sayde Ministers if they remooue from one Dioces to an nother, bee by no meanes admitted to serue, without testimonye of the Diocesan from whence they come, in writing, of their honesty, and ability. Item, that the Bysshop doe call home once in the yeare any Prebendary in his Churche, or beneficed in the Dioces whiche studieth at the Vniuersities, to knowe how hee profiteth in learninge: and that he be not suffered to bee a seruinge or a waytinge man dissolutely. Item, that at the Archedeacons, visitation, the Archedeacon shall appoynte the Curates to certayne taxes of the newe Testamente, to bee conde without booke. And at theire nexte Synode to exacte a rehearsall of theym. Item, that the Churchewardens once in ye quarter declare by theyre Curates in billes subscribed with their handes to the Ordinarye or to the nexte officer vnder him, who they bee whiche will not readyly paye theire penalties for not comminge to Goddes diuine seruice accordingly. Item, that the Ordinaries doe vse good diligente examination, to foresee all Simoniacall pactes or couenaunts with the Patrons or presenters, for the spoyle of their glebe, tithes, or mansion houses. Item, that no persons be suffered to marye within the Leuiticall degrees mentioned in a Table set forthe by the Archebysshoppe of Caunterburye in that behalfe,  Anno Domini  1563. and if any suche bee, to be separated by order of lawe. Articles for outwarde apparrell of persons Ecclesiasticall. FIrst, that al Archebysshoppes and Bysshoppes do vse & continewe their accustomed apparrell. Item, that all Deanes of cathedrall churches, Masters of Colledges, all Archedeacons, and other dignities in Cathedral churches: doctors, bachelers of Diuinitye and Lawe, hauing any Ecclesiasticall liuinge, shall weare in their common apparrell abrode, a syde gowne with sleeues streyght at the hande, without any cuttes in the same. And that also without any fallinge cape: and to weare typpets of sarcenet, as is lawfull for them by thact of parliament, Anno 24.  Henrici octaui. Item, that all doctors of Physick, or of any other facultye, hauinge any liuinge ecclesiasticall, or any other that may dispende by the churche one hundred markes, so to bee estemed by the fruites or tenthes of their promotions: and all Prebendaries, whose promotions be valued at twenty pound or vpward, weare the like apparrell. Item, that they and all ecclesiasticall persons, or other hauinge any ecclesiasticall liuinge, doe weare the cappe appointed by the Iniunctions. And they to weare no hattes but in their iourneinge. Item, that they in theyre iourneinge do weare theire clokes with sleeues put on, and lyke in fasshion to their gownes, without gards, welts, or cuts. Item, that in their priuate howses and Studies, they vse their owne liberty of comely apparrell. Item, that all inferiour Ecclesiasticall persons shall weare longe gownes of the fasshion aforesayde, and cappes as afore is prescribed. Item, that all poore Parsons, vicars and curates do endeuor themselues to conforme their apparrell in like sorte, so soone and as conuenientlye as theire abilitye will serue to the same. Prouided that their abilitye bee iudged by the Bysshop of the Dioces. And yf theire abilitye will not suffer to buye them longe gownes of the forme afore prescribed, that then they shall weare their shorte gownes, agreable to the forme before expressed. Item, that al suche persons as haue ben or be Ecclesiasticall, and serue not the minysterie, or haue not accepted or shall refuse to accepte the othe of obedience to the Queenes Maiesty, doe from hencefourth abrode weare none of the sayde apparrell of the forme & fasshion aforesayde, but to go as mere laye men, till they bee reconciled to obedience: and who shall obstinately refuse to do the same, yt they bee presented by the Ordinarye to the Commissioners in causes Ecclesiasticall, and by them to be reformed accordingly. Protestations to be made, promised and subscribed by them that shall hereafter bee admitted to any office, roome or cure in any Churche, or other place Ecclesiasticall. IN primis,  I shall not preache or publiquely interprete, but onelye reade that whiche is appointed by publique authoritye, without speciall license of the Bysshoppe vnder his seale. I shall reade the seruice appoynted, plainly, distinctly and audibly, that all the people may heare and vnderstande. I shall keepe the Register booke accordinge to the Queenes Maiesties Iniunctions. I shall vse sobrietye in apparrell, and specially in the Churche at Common prayers, accordinge to order appoynted. I shall moue the parishioners to quiet and concorde, and not geue them cause of offence, and shall helpe to reconcile them whiche be at variaunce, to my vttermoste power. I shall reade dayly at the leaste one chapter of the Olde Testament, and an other of the Newe with good aduisement, to thincrease of my knowledge. I do also faithfully promise in my person, to vse & exercise my office and place to the honor of God, to the quiet of ye Qeenes subiects within my charge, in truth, concorde and vnitye. And also to obserue,   keepe and mentayne suche order and vniformity in all externall policye, Rites and Ceremonies of the Church, as by the lawes, good vsuages and orders are allready well prouided and established. I shall not openlye intermedle with any artificers occupacions, as couetouslye to seeke a gayne thereby, hauinge in Ecclesiasticall lyuinge to the somme of twenty Nobles or aboue by yeare. Agreed vpon and subscribed by  Commissioners in causes Ecclesiasticall. Matthaeus Cantuariensis. Edmundus Londoniensis. Richardus Eliensis. Edmundus Roffensis. Robertus VVintoniensis. Nicolaus Lincolniensis. With others.