Articles concerning Religion and Doctrine. WHETHER be there any one, or more residing, lodging or abiding in your Parish, that hold, defend, set forth, or propose any Heresie, errors, or false opinions, contrary to holy Scripture, the Thrée Créedes, the Booke of Thirtie nine Articles, the Booke of Common Prayer, the Booke of Consecrating and ordayning Bishops, Priests, and Deacons? 2 Whether there be any in your Parish, that oppose, denie, or otherwise traduce the Kings Maiesties lawfull, and established supremacie ouer all persons, in all causes as well Ecclesiasticall as Temporall within his Highnesse Realmes and Dominions. 3 Whether there be any that affirme, or maintaine that the Church of  England  is not a true Church, but Hereticall, or Schismaticall, and that refuse to come into the publike Seruice, to receiue the Sacraments, to participate in other Diuine Rites and ceremonies with the Church of  England,  either as Popish Recusants, or Puritanicall Separatists and Schismatickes. 4 Whether there be any in your Parish that doe or hath frequented, celebrated, or vsed any vnlawfull Assemblies, priuate méetings, or conuenticles in priuate houses, vnder colour or pretext of Religion, repeating of Sermons, expounding   of Scripture, or that holdeth such méetings to be lawfull, to be according to Gods word, or such as may challenge the name of a Church? 5 Whether any in your Parish doe publish, sell, disperse, or communicate to others, any superstitious or Popish bookes, or writings, any Schismaticall, and Puritanicall, Libelles, treatises, or papers Derogatorie from, or contrary to the Religion, State, Church Gouernment of this Kingdome of  England,  the Lawes and Canons of the same, the Ministery and Priesthood therein? Present their names, qualities, and conditions. Articles concerning diuine Seruice and administration of the Sacraments. 1 HAth any of, or in your Parish spoken, or declared any thing to disgrace, depraue, contemne or derogate from the forme of Diuine Seruice, in the Book of Common Praier? 2 Bée there any in your Parish that either absolutely refuse to come into Church and be present at Prayer, or ordinarily walke abroad, or that vsually tarrie at home, or come not into the Church till Sermon begin? 3 Doth your Minister reade diuine Seruice according to the Iniunctions in the booke of Common Prayer; doth he diminish, alter, or change the forme prescribed, in part, or in all, vsing Prayers in stead thereof of his owne deuising, and conceiuing? 4 Whether doth hee reade the Confession, and absolution thereupon to be pronounced, or doth he change the words thereof to make it a Prayer, doth hee in reading the first, and second lessons, expound the Chapters, as he readeth: doth hee stand at the Gospell and Créed, and obserue the forme prescribed   in the Booke, or not? 5 Whether is the Sacrament of Baptisme by him rightly and duely administred according to the prescript forme expressed in the Booke of common Prayer, without adding, altering, or detracting from any part, or point therein: Doth he refuse to vse the Interrogatories prescribed, the signe of the Crosse commanded: Doth he vse the words, and not doe the Acte: hath he admitted the Fathers, or Mothers in publike, or in priuate Baptisme to be Godfathers and Godmothers to their owne children: whether doth he vse to baptise the childe at the Font, or in some Bason at his seate where hée readeth Prayer, or is the Font translated and placed there, or néere thereto from the Church-doore, where it should stand, signifying that Baptisme is our entry into the Church of God? 6 Whether hath he refused in case of necessity, to baptise Children at home, haue any so dyed vnbaptised, or will he not baptise the children of Papists being offered to baptisme: such as he borne out of wedlocke as Bastards, or vnlesse the Father will affirme publikely at the Font, being asked, it is his owne childe? 7 Whether is the blessed Sacrament of the Lords Supper so administred as is prescribed,  viz.  once euery Moneth, or thrice at the least in the yeare? 8 Item in time of administration are any suffered to bee present, that doe not communicate: Doth your Minister in administring it vse the garments, and vestments prescribed, Doth he consecrate the Bread and Wine, with those words that are set downe, if not, how and in what manner? 9 Doth he first reuerently vpon his knées receiue himselfe and then seuerally, and distinctly giue it to the communicants, they méekely knéeling, and not standing or sitting either at   the Table, or vpon some bench? Whether is the Bread wholsome and swéet? Is the Wine as it should be, representing blood; not Sacke, White-wine, Water, or some other Liquor. And if more bread and wine be afterward brought, the first not sufficing which was consecrated, doth hée first vse the words of consecration vpon it, before he giue it to the Communicants, as is prescribed  Can. xxj. 10 Whether in solemnizing of Marriage, visitation of the sicke, Buriall of the dead, Churching of women, doth your Minister vse such maner and forme, such words, Rites, and Ceremonies as are prescribed: and if not, then in what maner doth he performe them? Articles concerning the Church, the Ornaments, sacred vtensils, and possessions of the same. 1 WHether haue you in your Church, the whole Bible of the largest volumne, and last Translation, the Booke of Common Prayer, with the Booke of Ordination of Bishops, Priests, and Deacons, the two Bookes of Homilies? 2 Haue you a Font of Stone, for the administration of Baptisme, set vp in the vsuall place néere the Church doore, with a couer to kéepe it from dust and soyle? 3 Haue you a conuenient, and decent Communion Table, placed conueniently as it ought, with a Carpet of silke, or some other comely stuffe to be laid vpon it in time of diuine Seruice, and a cleane linnen cloth for the time of Communion? 4 Is it prophaned at any time, by sitting on it, casting hats or cloakes vpon it, writing, or casting vp accounts, or any other indecent vsage? 5 Haue you in your Church a conuenient seate for your Minister to reade Diuine Seruice, and to preach in a comely, large, and fine Surplice, a Communion Cup and flagon of siluer or pewter, a Chest for Almes with thrée lockes and keyes, another chest for kéeping the bookes, ornaments, and vtensils of the Church: Haue you a Register Booke in parchment for Christnings, Burials, Marriages, and are these duely and faithfully written and recorded therein, or not, and is the same safely kept in a chest with thrée lockes and keyes according to the Canon? 6 Whether is your Church, Chappell, Chancell, sufficiently repaired, decently and comely kept, as well within as without, be the seats maintained, the Stéeple and bels preserued, the windowes glased, the floore paued, and all things in such sort as may well be séeme the house of God? 7 Whether is your Church-yard well mounded, and fenced, kept cleane without Nusance, or soyle cast into it: is it incroached vpon, and by whom? doe any offensiuely kéepe doores, outletts, or passages into your Church-yard: doe any vse to quarrell, fight, play, or make méetings, banquets, Church-ales there: doe any kéepe Courts, Léetes, Lawdayes, Musters there: or otherwise vse it being a consecrated place, prophanely contrary to the 88. Canon? Articles concerning Ministers and Preachers of Gods word. 1 WHether is your Minister a Preacher or not: of what degrée is he in the Vniuersitie, is he a licensed Preacher, doth he personally reside vpon his benefice: if not, how long doth he vse to absent himselfe, how doth he take order for seruing of his Cure, whether by a sufficient and honest man: what allowance doth he make him according to the proportion of his Benefice? 2 Whether is your Minister or Curate a man of honest life, fame and reputation, a quarreller, make-bate, sower of strife, sedition, dissention, or doth he commonly vse Alehouses, or vnlawfull games, is hee defamed or detected for drunkennesse, swearing, swaggering, or any indecent misbehauiour, to the disgrace of his holy function and calling? 3 Doth your Minister catechize the youth of the Parish vpon Sundayes in the after-noone, halfe an houre before euening prayer, in that Catechisme authorised in the common booke, and no other, and if any Parishioners refuse to send their Children, or Seruants to be catechised, let them be presented? 4 Whether doth your Minister admit to preach in his Cure any stranger without requiring his Licence, or any inconformeable man, or suspended from Preaching, and if yea, how often, and whom hath he so admitted? 5 Hath your Minister preached against, or confuted any Doctrine deliuered by any other minister, in the same, or any other Church within the Diocesse, before hee hath acquainted the Bishop therewith, and bin directed by him what to doe: to the disturbance of the Churches peace, or the scandall, or offence of others? 6 Hath your Minister preached or taught any new, and strange Doctrine, contrary vnto, or disagréeing from the booke of Articles, and the literall sense thereof? Doth your Minister preach or teach any thing contrary to his Maiesties late Iniunctions, about Predestination, falling from Grace, &c. to trouble mens minds with those déep and darke points, which of late haue so distracted and  engarboyled the world? 7 Doth your Minister vse in his prayer, to pray for the King, the Quéene, Clergie, Counsell, &c. and conclude with the Lords prayer according to the 55. Canon? 8 Haue you any superinducted Preacher, or Lecturer in your Parish: doth he twice in the yeare at least, reade Diuine Seruice, both morning & euening, two seuerall Sundayes, publikely in his surplice: doth he twice a yeare administer the Sacraments, with such Rites and Ceremonies as be prescribed in the Communion booke, according to the .56. Canon? 9 Doth your Minister solemnly bid holi-dayes, and fasting dayes in the wéek following, hath he married any without asking the banes thrice, doth he of his owne head and voluntarie motion, appoint or kéep any solemne fasts publikely or in priuate houses, other than such as by Law are, or by authority shall be appointed, or is he present at any such, in, or out of his Parish: Doth he hold, or frequent any méetings for Sermons, commonly called Prophesyings, or Exercises in market townes or other places: Doth hee vpon any pretence whatsoeuer by Fasting and Prayer take vpon him to cast out any Deuill, or Deuils in any obsessed, or possessed person? 10 Doth your Minister vpon euery Sunday when there is no Sermon, reade an Homilie, or some part thereof, doth he once in the yeare reade ouer the booke of Canons, vpon some Sundayes, or Holi-dayes, before euening prayer, according to the Iniunction from his Maiestie? 11 Doth your Minister vpon euery Wednesday and Friday reade the Letany in your Parish Church, or Chappell, according to the 15. Canon: hath he not diuers times omitted so to doe since your last presentments. 12 Doth your Minister alwayes, and at euery time both morning and euening, reading diuine Seruice, and administring the Sacraments, and other Rites of the Church, weare the Surplice according to the Canons, and doth he neuer omit wearing of the same at such times? 13 Doth your Minister vse in his common course of life   that decent apparell, answerable to his calling and degrée, both abroad and at home, in iourneys and otherwise, as is ordained by the 74. Canon? 14 Hath any man residing in your Parish being a Deacon, or Priest, relinquished his Function, and betaken himselfe to a Lai-mans life, or vocation? 15 Doth any Person of what degrée or calling soeuer, kéepe or retaine in his house any Chaplaine, or Minister, to reade Prayers, Preach, instruct his Family, who are they, how many, of what condition or degrée? 16 Doth your Minister reside, and dwell vpon his Parsonage, the Uicarage house, or else-where, doth he kéepe it in good and sufficient reparations or not? 17 Doth your Minister yearely in Rogation wéeke, for the knowing and distinguishing of the bounds of Parishes, and for obtaining Gods blessing vpon the fruits of the ground, walke the Perambulation, and say  or sing in English, the Gospells, Epistles, Letanie, and other deuout prayers, together with the hundred and third, and hundred and fourth Psalmes? 18 Whether your Minister be knowne to be, or is vehemently suspected to be, an Usurer, Regrator, Wood-monger, buyer and seller of Timber, or to vse any other scandalous and defamed trade, and course of life, contrary to the Statute of this Realme, and honour of his calling? 19 Doth your Minister before the seuerall times of administring the holy Communion, especially before Easter, admonish and exhort his Parishioners, if they haue their consciences troubled, to resort vnto him, or some other learned and discréet Minister, to reueale, and open his griefe, and dis i tnesse  that so he may receiue such Ghostly counsell and comfort, that his conscience may be quieted, and himselfe receiue the benefit of Absolution? 20 If any man confesse his secret and hidden sinnes to the Minister, for the disburthening of his conscience and receiuing consolation, doth, or hath the Minister at any time reuealed that thing committed to his trust and secresie, contrarie to the 113. Canon? Articles concerning Matrimonie. 1 HAue any béene married within your Parish, that were within the degrées of affinity, or consanguinity by the law of God forbidden; if any present their names? 2 Haue any within your Parish, béene married secretly in priuate houses, or without their parents, or gouernours consent signified, being vnder the age of one and twenty yeares? 3 Doe any persons lawfully married, liue asunder, vnlawfully, and in whom is the default? 4 Haue any persons (their banes being not thrice published in the Church) béene married without Licence, who were present at such marriages, and what Minister married them? 5 What Popish Recusants, or their children haue béene married in your Parish, in what sort was that Matrimonie solemnized, when, and by whom? haue any persons béene married in prohibited times without licence? Articles concerning the Church-wardens. 1 BEE the Church-wardens chosen by the Minister and Parishioners, according to the 89. Canon, and whether hath any taken vpon him to be Church-warden, being not chosen, or hath any continued one yeare in his office without a new choyse? 2 Haue any Church-wardens retained any of the Church   goods, and not made a iust account of what they haue receiued, and expended? 3 Haue your Church-wardens, and Sidemen béene, and are they diligent in their office, to sée decencie kept in the Church, and order in the time of Common Prayer, and administration of the Sacraments, and that there be no disturbance, but sobernesse and quietnesse in the Church. And doe the Church-wardens kéep a booke in your Parish, wherein the Names of euery strange Preacher in your parish is set downe, and haue the Church-wardens suffered any to preach not shewing or hauing no Licence? Articles concerning the Parishioners. DOe any in your Parish prophane the Sunday by vnlawfull games, drinking, or tipling in the time of common prayer or Sermon; and by working and doing the ordinarie workes of their vocation and trades? 2 Are there any in your parish that doe impugne or speake against the Rites and Ceremonies of the Church of  England,  or the lawfull vse of them? And the gouernment of this Church vnder his Maiestie by Archbishops, Bishops and other ecclesiasticall officers? 3 Who in your Parish doe come to Sermon onely, and not to diuine Seruice, And who doe not reuerently behaue themselues during the time of diuine Seruice, deuoutly knèeling, when the generall Confession of Sinnes the Letany, the ten Commandements, and all Prayers and Collects are read, and vsing all due and lowly reuerence, when the blessed name of the Lord Iesus is mentioned, and standing vp when the Articles of the Beliefe, and  Gloria Patri  are read or said? who doe couer their heads in the Church during the whole time of Diuine Seruice, vnlesse it be in case of necessitie, in which case they may weare a nightcap, or who doe giue themselues to babling, talking, or walking, and are not attentiue to heare the Word read and preached? Haue any to your knowledge, publikely or priuately spoken against   the bending of the knée at the name of the Lord Iesus, or vsed disgracefull speech against the acte, or such as vse the act of reuerend bowing toward the Communion Table, when they come to it to administer the Sacrament &c. what words haue béene vsed, by whom, or where that way: tell their names, and words spoken, if you can? 4 Is there any of your Parish hauing a Preacher to their Minister, that doe absent themselues from his Sermons, and resort to other places, to heare other Preachers: Or doe any in your parish communicate or baptize their children in any other parish? 5 Are there any in your parish that refuse to haue their children baptized, or themselues to receiue the Communion of your Minister, taking exception against him, or haue any wiues that refuse to come to Church, according to the booke of Common Prayer, to giue thanks to God for their safe deliuerance, in a decent habite, as hath béene anciently accustomed? 6 Hath any in your Parish spoken slanderous and reproachfull words against your Minister, to the scandall of his vocation, or against his Neighbour, defaming them touching any crime of Ecclesiasticall cognizance? 7 Whether doe any in your parish exercise any trade, or labour, buy, or sell, or kéepe open shops, or set out any wares to be sold vpon Sundayes, or Holidayes, by themselues, their seruants, or Apprentices, or haue otherwise prophaned the said dayes? 8 Is the fift of  Nouember  kept holy, and thansgiuing made to God, according to the order set forth in that behalfe? 9 Is there any in your Parish that bee, or are commonly knowne, or reputed to bee Blasphemers of Gods holy name, Drunkards, Adulterers, Fornicators, incestuous persons, concealers or harbourers of Fornicators, or Adulterers: Haue any béene detected or vehemently suspected of such notorious crimes, and what penance haue they done for the same? 10 What person, or persons haue died, and departed this mortall life since the second day of  February  last past; and whether did they make any last wils, or Testaments, and who were their Executors, or whether dyed they intestate, and who hath the administration of their Goods: and what be the names of such deceased, and Executors, and Administrators? 11 Whether haue any in your parish administred the goods of any person deceased without lawfull authority, and before he or they haue proued the will or Testament of the party deceased, or haue obtained commission from the Ordinary to dispose the said moueable goods; or are there any Willes vnproued, or Goods not administred? 12 What persons be excommunicate within your Parish, and for what cause to your knowledge, and doe any of them repaire to the Church, in time of prayer vnabsolued? 13 Whether haue any in your Parish giuen to the Church-wardens or Side-men, or to any of them, any euill words for doing their duties according to their Oathes and conscience, in making presentment for any fault? 14 Whether haue any within your Parish harboured any woman vnlawfully begotten with childe, and haue suffered her to depart away vnpunished? Articles concerning Schoole-masters, Physitians, and Chirurgians, and Parish Clarkes. 1 IS there any Schoolemaster in your Parish that teacheth publikely or priuately, not licensed by the Ordinary, the Bishop of the Diocesse. Doth he teach any Papists, or sectuaries children that come not to Church. And doth he instruct all his Schollers to learne the short Catechisme, by Law established, contained in the booke of Common Prayer. Is he a graduate, and sufficient to teach? 2 What Physitian or Chirurgion is in your Parish vnlicensed, and being not a Doctor of Physicke, in either of the Uniuersities, doth practise Physicke. And what ignorant persons haue left their trade, and taken vpon them to professe physicke, or Chirurgery; and who be they that so abuse the people? 3 Haue you a fit Parish Clarke aged twenty yeares at least, of honest life, able to reade and write. Are his and the Sextons wages paid without fraud; if not, then whose default is it. By whom is he chosen: is he diligent in his Office, and seruiceable to the Minister; Doth he meddle with any thing aboue his Office, doth he kéepe the Church cleane, the Doores locked. Is any thing lost or spoyled by his default, and doth he execute his Office duly? Articles concerning Ecclesiasticall Officers. 1 HAth any Chancellor Deputy, or Surrogate, or any other exercising Ecclesiasticall Iurisdiction within this Diocesse, or any Register, Apparitor or other Officer belonging to the Ecclesiasticall Court, exacted any extraordinary or greater Fées, than heretofore of late hath béene accustomed, or than are expressed in the table of Fées set vp in the  Consistory,  declaring what fées are due? 2 Lastly, Doe you know any other matter worthy of presentment, or any other person or persons, which haue committed any fault, or offence contrary to his Maiesties Ecclesiasticall Lawes, or hereof vehemently suspected not set downe or expressed in these Articles, by vertue of your Oathes present the said faults, and the names of the persons which haue committed, or are vehemently suspected for committing the same offences? THere must be a full, and seuerall presentment, on answer made to euery seuerall Article. FINIS.