The articles of the chri ten fayth. I Beleue in God the father almighty, maker of heaue¯ & earth. And in Iesu Christ hys onely sonne oure Lorde, whyche was conceyued by the holye gooste, and borne of Marye the virgyn. He suffered vnder Poncius Pylate, he was crucifyed, dead and buryed. He desended to hell, and rose the thyrde daye from death. He ascended to the heauens, and syttteth on the ryght hande of God the father almyghty. And from thens shal he come to iudge the quicke and dead. I beleue in the holy goost the holy churche catholyke, to be a congregacion of sayntes, to haue remission of synnes, the resurrection of the fleshe, and the euerlastynge lyfe.   At the fyrst we beleue in one God. Deut. vi. & father of our lorde Iesus Christ. ii. Cor. i. the whyche is the Lorde of heauen and earth. Luke. xi. and creatour of al creatures. Hebre. i. Yea he is father of vs all. Ephe. iiii. the which hath elected vs to be his crildren through Iesu Christe. Ephe. i. And therfore shall we hym all onely worship, & besyde hym none other gods. Deut. v . Also we shall feare him as an almigh ty god. Psal. xxxiiii. and as a mercyfull father we shal loue him wyth al oure hertes, with all our soule, and wyth al our power and mynde. Mat. xxii. and vpon him muste stande all oure hope. Hiere. vii. For he is the father of lyghte. Iacob. i. of the whythe all mankynde lyueth, Actu. xvii. both  odelye goodes Prouerbeo. x. euerlastynge saluacion. Psalm. xxxvii. togyther wyth al perfyte gyftes come, and descended. Iacob. i.   Forthermore we beleue in Iesu Christe, the so¯ne of the lyuing god our lorde. i. Cor. vii   The whiche is the very bryghtnesse of his fathers glorye, and the verye ymage of his substaunce. Hebre. i. Yea he is the onely begotten sonne of the father. Iohn. i. come forth out of the mouth of the moste hyghest God. Eccles. i. xxiii. fyrst borne before all creatures. Collos. i. Thorowe the whiche all thynges are created. Heb. i. In whom we haue redempcion, namely remission of synnes thorow his bloude. Col. i. wyth the whyche he hath wasshed vs. Apoc. i. and hath also reconciled vs agayne to hys most holy and gloriouse father. Ephes i. ii. that were afore enemyes to God. Roma. viii.  For after the tyme that god had made man after his ymage and similitude, he set hym into Paradise, that he shoulde eate of al the fruites of the garden of pleasure, exceptynge hym the tre of knowledge of good & euyil. Gene. ii. But man hath disobeyed the Lorde his God, and transgressed his commau¯dement. Gen. iii. Thorowe the whyche disobedience and transgression of the godlye commaundement, death and curse is come ouer all mankynde. Rom. v. And when there was no helpe nor comfort for man, wherby he myghte haue bene redemed or delyuered out of Sathans power. Then had God the merciful father pitie vpon mankinde and promised the¯ a sead namely Iesus Christ, his onelye begotten sonne, the whiche shoulde treade vpon t e head of the serpent, and ouercome the deuyll, and restore the¯ to lyfe agayne. Gene. iii. And lyke wyse as god is ryghtuouse in al his wayes, and holye in all his workes. Psal. criv. and  ew in al his wordes. Psal. li. so hath he kepte all his promyses truely. And as the tyme was fulfylled. Gala. iiii. God let   hys worde descende into the wombe of the vyrgyn Marye, and by the workynge of the holy gooste be came fleshe: as Iohn wytnesseth saiyng: The word became flesh & dwelt amonge vs, & we saw his glory, as the glory of the onely begotten sonne of the father ful of grace and verite Iohn. i. Also thys onely begotten sone of god by the powre of the holy ghoste became man and is become lyke vnto vs in all thinges except synne Hebre. ii. He hathsuffered death for our sake. Esay. liii. and hath taken awaye Sathans powre, and restored lyfe in agyne. i. Timot. vi. yea he is made vnto vs wysdome and ryghtwysnes, sanctyfyenge and redemption. i. Cor. i. And lykewyse as he dyed for our synnes. Hebre. ii. so is he rysen agayn through the powre of his father Roma. vi. for our righ tuousnes Roma. iiii. And as he oftentymes shewed hym felfe after his resurreccyon, vnto his dyscyples. Acti. i. so is he ascended into hea uen in thyr presence. Luke. xxiiii. And sytteth at the right hande of the almighty rather. Ro. viii. Aboue all rule, and myght, and dominion and aboue all that maye be named, not onely in thys world, but also in the world to come  phesi. i. And hath subdewed all thynges vnder hys fete. Hebre. ii. in summa, he is alorde aboue all lordes, and a kyng aboue all kynges. Apo. xix. yea he is an almighty god with his fa ther. Apo. xxii. Iohn. x. And neuerthelesse he is also our onely aduocate and mediator. i. Iohn. ii. Tymo. ii. our onely hye priest. Hebre. v. the sacrifyce that he hath done for our synnes, abydeth of valure for euermore.   ebre x.   Forthermore likewyse as Christ our lord is ascended vp into heauen, so shall he come agayne   from heauen Act. i. wyth the dominion of his father, & with the angels. Mat. xxv. for to gyue euery man rewarde after his workes, yea for to iuge yt quicke & dead. Act. x. Tim. iiii   We beleue also in the holy gost god with the father & the so¯ne, which holy goste is a teacher of all chrysten. Ioh. xiiii. and he doth cloth them with his gyftes, and giueth euery one the measure of feyth after his owne wyll. i. Corin xii. and kepeth them vnmouable in one fayth, for he is a ruler of the christian congregacyon Acti. xx. He is also the anoyntement. i. Iohn. ii. wherwith all christen are anoynted, and of that behalfe are called the anoynted of the lorde. Psal. ciiii.   So is this holy gost geue¯ vnto the christen as an erneste of theyr inherytaunce to theyr re dempcyon, and they agayne be his owne to the prayse of his glorye Ephesi. i. In summa it is impossible without this holy ghoste to knowe god ryghtly. i. Cor. ii. or with all the hole herte to beleue vpon hun. i. Corin. xii. or to call vpon him as a father. Roma. viii. And therfore doth god poure this his holy ghoste vpon his chil dren, wherby thei may rightly knowe him, and ryghtly beleue in hym, and as a ryght father call vpon hym. Sata. iiii.   This is our belefe to the father so¯ne and holy ghoste, which thre we knowledge to be one god. Deut. vi. whose seate is the heauen, and the erth is a benche of his fete. Esay. xivi. yea the which is an euerlastynge. ii. Mach. i. an almyghty. Psal.  v. a ryhgtuouse. Psa. ii. and a mercyfull god. Psal. cxiv. The which alone wylbe worshypped and serued. Deu. vi. For he can alone helpe vs. Esaye. xliii. whyche   he doth for his names sáke & not for oure rygh tuousenes sake Esay. rliii.   Forthermore as we haue said that al they that do beleue are ioyned togyther, & through the holy goost knitte in vnitie, so is there a chri sten church, the with is buylded of lyuing stones. i. Pet. ii. which church is the house of god. Heb. iii. & the house of god is the congregacion of God. i. Timoi. iii. and the congregacyon of God is the bodye of Christ. Ephesians. i. And seynge that al right christians are one bodye.  . Cor. r. in the which they al through one spirite are baptised. i. Cor. rii. So muste there be a communion of sayntes, namely that al sayntes or true beleuers are also ioyned togyther in vnitie, as the membres of one body. Rom. xii. And in this co¯munio¯ of saintes is remission of sinnes, & that wout it is no sinne forgiue¯, nor any hope of saluacion. Ephe. ii. yea like as it is vnpossible yt a menbre ca¯ lyue that is not in the bo dy, so is it possible yt any man may lyue in hys soule, & ca¯ be releaced out of death by remission of synne, the which is not a menbre of the body of Christ. For Christ hath reconciled vs al vnto god his father in one bodye. Ephe. ii. And ther fore must al they sta¯de in variau¯ce yt are no   bres of this body, of yt which Christ is yt head. Eph. i. to the which he giueth saluacio¯. Eph.    Now must we also knowe that howe be it that God alwayes forgyueth synnes. Esay. xliii. yet hath Christ giuen vnto his congregacion power to bynde and to lowse which shall not be vndersca¯de after the antichrist doctrine the byshoppe of Rome hath power to remitte synnes, but the christen congregacion whose heade is Christe, and not the Romyshe Antechrist,   and is rewled of the holy gooste and not of the fornicatyshe spirite of the Prophetysse Iesabell. Thys congregacion I saye hath power to bynde & lowse (that is to saye) all what she byndeth other lowseth is done by the power of oure Lorde Iesu Christe. i. Cor. v. and thorow the holy goste, as a rewler of the christen congregacion. Actu. xx. so is there in the christen congregacion remission of synnes.   There shal be also a general resurrection of the fleshe, namely that all they that are dead shal ryse agayne, some to euerlastyng lyfe, and some to euerlasting dampnacion. Iohn. v And they that shall lyue and remayne vntyl the co¯myng of our Lorde Iesu Christe, they shall be chaunged in the twynkelynge of an eye, at the tyme of the last  ompet. i. Corhin. xv. For the trompet (sayth Paule) shal blow, and the dead shal ryse vncorruptible, and we shalbe chaunged. For this corruptible body must put on vn corruptibilitie, and thys mortall bodye muste put on immortalitie. i. Corhin. xv.   At the laste is there also an euerlastynge lyfe. Iohn. xvii. whyche all they shall receyue that beleue on Iesu Ihrist. Iohn. vl. and stedfastlye abyde in good workes sekynge prayse honour, and immortalitie. Roma. ii.   Thys is the summe of oure beliefe, yea and a ryght christen beliefe, thorowe the which fayth all ryghtuouse lyue. A ac. ii. And wyth out the whyth beliefe no man may please god. Heb. xv. Therfore must the euerlastynge God be blessed, that out of his immeasurable mercy and grace, hath gyuen vs thys fayth thorowe Iesu Christe. Ephe. ii. And this is the some of our fayth wyth the shortest.  The sacrament of Baptysme. BAptysme is a sacramenttall token, the whiche is geuen vs of Christe. Math. xxviiii. And is at the fyrste an entrynge into the christen congregacyon (as Paule sayth) we are baptysed in one spirite to be one bodye. i. Corhi. xii.   Secondarily, it is a fountayne of regeneracion, as Paul witnesseth, saying that Christ hath saued vs by the fountayne of the newe byrthe, and renewynge of the holy gooste. Tit.  . Not that the water doth saue vs, for nothynge can saue vs, but ouely god, Esay. xliii. But after that our Lorde Iesu christ hath spo ken: that he that beleueth and is baptised shal be saued. Mar. xvi. and Goddes worde is veritie. Iohan. xvii and his promyses maye not fayle. Psal. cxlvii. Therefore muste baptisme nead s bringe saluacion vnto them that in beliefe are baptised, not for the workes sake, but for goddes worde and promises D u. viii.   Thyrdely baptysme is a couenaunt of a good conscience to god. i. Pet. iii. namelye that he that in beliefe is baptised, bindeth him selfe or maketh a couenaunt with god: that from thens forth he wyll lyue after hys wyll. And of this couenauntes behalfe, whiche muste be done out of a cleane faythfull herte, hath the baptysme powre, and not for the waters sake, wherwith the fylthynesse of the fleshe myghte be washed awaye. But wythout it be that the hertes of them that are baptysed, be cleansed. Act. xv. thorowe Goddes worde. Iohn. rv. the water can not   them. Wherwith it is also proued, that baptisme without fayth may in no wyse be broked.   Forthly baptisme sygnifieth an offeryng   of the fleshe, and a resurrectyon into a newe lyfe, as we haue vnto the Romaines, know ye not (sayeth Paule) that al we whiche are baptysed, in the name of Iesu Christe, are baptysed, to dye wyth him. Therfore are we buryed wyth hym by baptysme for to dye, that lyke wyse as Christ was raysed vp from death, by the glory of the father, eue¯ so we should walke in a newe lyfe.  . Rom. vi. This is now shortly expressed what baptysme is, and what it signifyeth. Nowe muste we also knowe, that seynge no good worke wythout fayth maye be done. Rom. xiiii. So muste he that shal be baptysed beleue, or els he can not ryghtly be baptised, as we maye clearelye vnderstande in the wordes of Christ Iesu, wherwyth he hath institute this baptysme, and commaunded his apostles, sayinge: Go and preache the gospell to   creatures, he that beleueth and is baptysed, shalbe saued. Mar. xvi. Here wyll no sophisti  reasonynges and dreames be alowed, for the Lorde wyll destroye the wysedome of the wyse, and wyll take awaye the vnderstanding of the prudent, and wyl make the wisedome of thys worlde folishnesse. i. Cor i. and. iii. But the worde of God shal abyde for euer. i. Pet. i. And Christe sayeth: that heauen and earth shal perishe, but my wordes shal abide. Mat. xxiiii. Therfore muste also the wordes of Christe (he that beleueth and is baptysed &c.) not be altered or chaunged. And seynge that Christe hath instituted or ordeyned fayth afore baptisme, so muste he that shal be baptised beleue, or els the wordes of Christ suffereth force, and are wholye and fals lye altered and chaunged, as we now a dayes alas may  e, and it is a miserable   thynge, that thys baptysme is so euyll vnderstande, and so shamefully broken. And seynge that the scripture doth so clearely therof wytnesse. Though that all the wytnesses of scripture perteynyng to thys matter, be not here alledged for the shortnesse sake, yet do we take out one of them, namely the example of the Apostle Philip, which when he shewed Goddes worde vnto the gelded man, whyche was the chamberlayne to Candas, Quene of the Moryans, and he him selfe desyred to be baptised, but the  ewe minister of god Philip, woulde not baptyse hym, excepte he dyd not onely beleue, but also openly confessed it. Act. viii. This example is well worthye to be marked, for  t the fyrste we maye se here the greate diligence and howe desyrous the chamberlayne was of baptysme, whyche is a learnyng vnto al them that loue theyr saluacion, that they shal desyre thys worke hertelye, and not deferre it, b  as sone as they by hearyng of the worde of  . Roma. x. wyth the operacion of the holy go st i. Cor. xi . hath receyued fayth. And yf there be any ma¯ that wyl not be satisfied with this ensample of Philip, let hym perceyue also howe Ananias dyd compel Paule, saying vnto him: why taryest thou? aryse and be baptysed, and washe a waye thy synnes. A tu. xxii. Here we se that Baptysme, after the fayth is receyued, maye not be deferred. Therfore hath the cham berlayne with greate diligence desyred baptisme after that he dyd beleue, saying vnto Philip: Beholde here is water, what shoulde lefte me to be baptysed? Actuum. viii. Forthermore seynge  he trewe minister of God Philippe, woulde not baptyse hym, excepte he confessed   his fayth: doubtlesse he hath therwyth teached vs, that all they that wyll be baptysed, muste confesse theyr beliefe, as ye se the chamberlayne dyd. But for as muche as all the former scriptures are spoken of them onelye that bee of yeres of discretion before they receyue the fayeth of Christ: It is no altering of the institution and worde of Christe, to baptyse the innocentes and vnbeleuynge infauntes, whyche haue not as yet receyued the vse of reason, wherby they myght decerne fayth to beleue and professe the name of Christe. For as in the circumsition of the olde lawe the fayth of the parentes sufficed to make the chylde one of the chosen people of God, notwythstandyng that the circumsicion of the flesh is not circu¯sicion (as Paule wrytteth to the Romaynes) but the circumsion of the herte, euen so in the baptisme of our infantes, notwythstandynge that the washing of the body in water is not baptysme, but the washynge of the soule in the bloude of Christe by fayth: yet shall the fayth of the parentes be accepted of God and theyr chyldren made members of the churche of Christe therby. Yf anye require wytnesses of the scripture for thys assersion: lette hym reade and consyder well the storye of Samson, and Samuell, wyth other lyke storyes of the olde testament, wherin may easilie be perceyued how god dyd then accepte the chyldren for the parentes fayth. Let him co¯ syder also the stories of the gospel, wherin appeareth how Christ woulde not haue the chyldre¯ kepte from him when theyr pare¯tes brought them to hym that he myght laye his handes vpon them, and how certeyne chyldren were cured   of diseases euen for the fayeth that was founde in theyr parentes. And laste of all it is euident both in the Actes, and Epistles of the Apostles, that when certeyne men receyued the gospell, both they and theyr whole housholdes were baptysed. Where it is not to be thought that the infantes were reiected, bycause they could not vnderstande the Apostles preaching. For saynte Paule wrytiynge to the Corhinthians as concernynge the chyldren begotten betwene an heathen man and a faythfull woman, or betwene an heathen woman & a faythfull man: sayeth that the chyldren are cleane by the reasone that one of his parentes is faythfull. And what other thynge shoulde  e meane ther y but that God accepteth those chyldren for members of his churche, whom the faythfull parentes do wyllyngly brynge to the foun tayne of regeneration, there to receyue the signe of the euerlastynge couenaunte betwene God and vs? And yf any man wyl wyllingly withstande Christe and his Apostles, and do other wyse then Christe hath commaunded, and his Apostles taughte and dyd, he is blynded, but his blyndnesse shall waxe manifest well ynough. Lykewyse as the Egypcians sorcerars, the whiche wythstode Moyses and Aaron, but at the laste were manifestlye seen and knowen. ii. Timo. iii. Thys is wyth the shortest the fayth of our baptisme.  Of the supper of the lorde. THe supper of the lorde, is a memoriall token of the suffering and death of Iesu Christe and is instituted of Chryste for this cause, that the faythfull congregacyon of Iesu Chryst, sholde come togyther, for to shewe the death of Iesu Chryst, and his benefytes, laudynge and thankynge hym, magnyfyenge his holy name, and then also eate of this bread and dryncke of thys wyne, to a remembraunce that Chryste hath gyuen his body and shed his bloude for vs. Math xxvi. And because that it is a comyn vse that a token of remembraunce hath the name of the thynge that is remenbred by it. Therfore hath Chryst called the breade his bodye, and the wyne his bloude: not that his substaunce is in the breade and wyne, but that we sholde remember hym therby. Lykewyse as the  aster la¯be was called the passyng by, and yet was it not in it selfe the very pas syng by, but a token or remembraunce of the passyng by. Deynge now that the easter lambe hath the name of the thing that the Israelites remembred by it, and wherby they myght euer lastyngly kepe in remembraunce the benefytes of god, right conuenient is it that Christe hath called the breade his body, and the wyne hys bloud bicause that we shoulde remember therby his death and passion, yea the only sacrifice of his body, whiche he hath sufferyd to be broken and his bloud to be shed for vs. Neuerthelesse how be it that the materyall body of Chryste is not in the bread, nor his bloude in the wyne, yet neuerthelesse is the supper of the Lorde   parttakynge (but spyrytually) of the body and bloud of Chryste, as Paule sayth: Is not the  uppe of thankes geuyng wherwith we gyue   tha¯kes, a parte taking of the bloud of Christ? And the bread that we breake, is it not the   takyng of the body of Chryste? These wordes of Paule do witnesse clerely that the faythful eate the body of Christ spiritually, vnder the breade and wyne yea lykewyse as a bryde receyueth her housbande with a rynge, euen so receyue the faithfull Christe to be theyr owne and euerlastynge saluacyon. But that some men wyll haue that the bodyly presence sholde be in the breade, is a great mysse vnderstandynge of the godly worde: yea it is an antechrystes doctryne, which is contrary bothe to our fayth and to al holy scrypture. For we be leue and holy scrypture beareth wytnes, that Chryste after his resurrection is ascended vp into heauen, and sytteth vpon the ryght hand of his almighty father. Rom. viii. And bideth ther as concernynge hys bodyly presence, but spiritually he hath promised to abide with vs to the ende of the worlde in hys worde Mat. xxviii. And seynge that now Chryste as concer nyng his bodely presence abydeth at the ryght hand of his father Hebre. x. so may not the body of Chryste be in the breade. And agayne it is agaynst all truth that Chryste at one tyme hath ben in many or diuers places, as touching his body. Forthermore we do dayly se what dredful ydolatrye is s rong out of the carnall vnderstandynge of these wordes of Chryste: This is my body, and yet dayly spryngeth, to the great and abominable slaunder of the honoure of god so that men worshype a piece of breade for theyr god, yea and holde that to be theyr maker. And the papystes locke hym in  olde and syluer, not remenbrynge what Paule   and Stephen wytnesse sayenge: The mooste hyghest wyll not dwell in temples made wyth mannes handes. Actes. vii. and. xvii. O blynde men that are so bewytched of the whore, that ye can not nor wyll not beleue the manifeste truth, O blyndnesse and great presumptuousnesse of the papistes, that wyll take vpon them to fetche Iesu Christe out of heauen, into a piece of breade, whyche is consumable, as we clearelye se by experience, and that it shoulde be worshypped for God, whyche is euerlastynge and vnchaungeable. Nowe what remedye for we can not helpe it, therfore muste we do as the Lorde Iesu Christe spake vnto hys apostles of the phariseis, sayinge: Let them go for they are blynde, and leaders of the blinde, when one blynde leadeth an oth r, so fall they both into the dytche. Mat. xv. But the Lorde muste be thanked that out of his vnmeasurable grace hath  ned our eyes, that we can se & knowe, wherfore we shal take the bread and the wyne in the supper, namely for a memoriall and token of the sufferyng and death of Iesu Christ yea for the body and bloud of Christe: but that for the by names sake, and not of the material thynges behalfe, as is aboue rehearsed of the Easter Lambe.   Forthermore the supper of the Lorde is also a ioynynge togyther of the christen co¯ regacion in loue. And also the congregacion that wyl holde thys supper, muste be well appoynted and ioyned togyther in brotherly loue, yea they must stande in one spirite and soule. Philip. i. hauing a burning loue. For Paule sayth: we many are one breade and one bodye, in as muche as we are partakers of one bread. Lyke   wise as yt mebres of one body are not in stri  one agaynste an other: but in a charitable vnitie seruynge one an other. i. Corhi. xii. so maye there no stryfe nor debate be founde in the con gregacion of God. i. Corhin. i. so that any man shoulde onely care and take thought for hym selfe, and not care nor loke vpon his brothers lacke, but the one muste helpe and care for the other in al thynges necessary, where he can or maye Gal. vi. and no man must seke that, that is his, but euery one the others wealth. Philip. ii. And lykewise as of the graynes of corne can not be baken breade, but through fyre: eue¯ so can not the congregacion be a right spirituall lofe (wherof Paule speaketh) but through burning loue & charitie. And so ought yt christen congregacion to be one lofe. i. Cor. x. For lykewyse as many graynes are sowen to the ente¯t that breade shoulde be baked of it. So soweth the greate father of housholde his preciouse wheate into the acre or grounde of this world, to the entent that they all shoulde become one lofe, and breake the supper of the Lorde rightly after the wordes of Paule: we many are all one breade and one body, in as much as we are parte takers of one breade. i. Cor. x. And where so euer the congregacion is not so apoynted and the breade broken in thys maner, there is the bread eaten, and the wyne dro¯ken to a iudgement, from the whiche God the merciful father wyll defende and kepe all diligent louers of the euerlastyng trueth tho owe his vnexpressable goodnesse and mercye. Amen.  Of the very chrstian kyngdome. VVE beleue also that god the heaue¯ly father, hath gyuen to his onely begotten sone Iesu Christe, al powre in heauen and erth Math. xxviii. yea as Paule sayth: He hath set hym on his ryght hande in heauenly thynges aboue all powre, rule, myght and domynyon, and a boue al that maye be named not onely in this worlde, but also in the worlde tocome. Ephe. i. Aboue all this hath the heaue¯ly father especyally instituted and ordeined Iesu Christ his onely begotten sonne, to be a kyng ouer the mount of Syon that is to say, ouer the faythfull congregacyon. Psalm. ii. whiche faythful congregacion is the kyngdome of Chryst. Col. i. And the domynyon of thys kyngdome standeth not in a carnall dominion or powre: But lykewise as the lorde is a spirite. ii. Corhinthians. iii. euen so is hys kyngdome spirituall inwardly within vs. Luke. xvii. and not of this worlde. Iohn. xviii. wherefore the prophete zacharie promysed vs a kynge thorough the holy ghoste, the which shold not come with vi iable dominion, nor great worldly tryumphe, but wt an humble and a meke spyrite, And shoulde not  ule as a worldly kynge ouer the carnal Syon or Israel, but shoulde rayngne a spirytuall kynge, and rule the spirituall Israelytes with the scepter of his godly worde. And these are the wordes of the prophet. Reioyse thou great lye O doughter Syon, be glad O doughter Ierusalem, beholde thy kynge cometh vnto the  owly and symple is he, he rideth vpon an Asse and vpon the foele of an Asse, euen thy rightwyse and sauyour, and he hym selfe is poore  . ix. These wordes of the prophete wytnesse   clearely that Christes kyngdome is spirituall, and standeth not in any outward dominion. Iohn. xviii. And lykewyse all these prophetes do witnesse in these chapyters folowing. Esa. iiii. ix. Ierem. xxiii. xxxii. Esechi. xxxiiii. xxxvii. Myth. iiii. Therfore do we holde the doctryne of the carnal kingdome of Christ to be a dredfull errowr, and a great heresye, yea we holde it to be an heresye, of the Chilcastes, the which now agayne is raysed amongest the¯ of Mynster, & hath breyded her out in other places, to the great slaunder and hinderaunce of the true gospel of god. Forthermore yf any man take vpon him and presume to be the promysed Da uyd or a kynge of Syon as Iohn Layden at Mynster hath done, hym do we holde for an antechriste aboue all antichristes, yea boue the Romysh Antechryste. How dredful so euer he hath slaundered god, and exalted hym selfe against the almighty god, and yet it is not com to suche an abhominacion, as to put hym selfe a kynge of Sion, or to take vpon hym to be a promysed dauyd: But in these dayes ryse so many abhominable and presumptuous spirite fulfylled with all maner of wyckednes, and sathans pride, that take vpon them to rebbe Iesu Christe of his kingli sc pter, and to take it vnto them selfes: wo be vnto all suche dred ful slaunderers of the godly maiesty or powre. wo be also vnto the seduceres which go about with witchecrafte wherwith they haue begyled many men. Wooe be also vnto all them whyche do not seperate them selues from those antechrystes and seducers, but yet do seke help or comforte of them, yea that leaue the verye Moy en Iesu Christ and desire other goddes   to go afore them, vpon the¯ shal fal that which is spoken of by the prophete Ieremye: Lorde they that do forsake the shalbe destroyed, and they that turne from the shall be ashamed, and theyr names shall be wrytten in the earthe, for they haue leaft the, the lyuynge fountayne of water. Beholde therfore wyll we by the grace of God, abyde by oure spirituall Kynge Iesu Christe, and pray hym that his kyngdome may encrease in vs, yea that he wyll defende vs from all euyll and reserue vs to his euerlastyng heauenly kyngdome, to his glory and honoure for euer. Amen.  The weapons wherwyth a very christian ought to fyght. SEynge that the whole Gospell of our  Sauiour wytnesseth that the christian must suffer, & in no wyse may reuenge the euil. So that we thynke by the helpe of god, not to turne from the holsome doctrine of our Lorde Iesu Christ. For it is righte conuenient that a seruaunt wyth his lordes co¯maundement, and a disciple wyth his maysters doctrine to be contented. Mat x. And here now may no sophistical cauillacions nor fonde ymaginacions be alowed, as though the wordes of Iesu Christe shoulde nowe be at an ende. And seynge that Christ sayth vnto his apostles: what I say vn to you, that do I saye vnto al, watche ye, heauen and earth shal perishe, but my wordes shal neuer peryshe. Therfore do we holde them for dreadful seducers and abominable heretykes, that w ll pre ume to saye, that the doctrine of   Iesu Christ (as co¯cernyng suffering) should be  t an ende, & that the christen shoulde no more nede to suffer, but that they shoulde cast away the weapons wher wt the apostles haue fought as theyr epistles rchearse, & put vpon them the harneys of Dauid, yea that they shoulde destroy the whole worlde wt the material sworde and also take the worlde vnto them selues. O what a blinde dreame is this, which is spronge out of Satha¯, & is contrary to the whole gospel of our lorde Iesu Christ. O what an iniquitie is this of the¯, that wyl with the chyldre¯ of Israel leaue the lorde the fou¯tayne of lyuing waters, & dygge them selues pyttes the whyche do seme fay e, but they ca¯ giue no water. O what a blindnes, yea what a folyshnes is it of them, that for the sayinges of the prophetes, whyche they vnderstande not, wyll refuse & leaue the moste highest prophet, the onely begotten sonne of god, & the euerlastynge veritie Iesu Christe and do not dreade to exalte the olde testamente aboue the new, & to set Moyses aboue Christ? O god shal now the new testament auoyed for the olde, & shal the preciouse bloud of the innocent lambe Iesu Christ be counted lesse then the bloud of calues? O lorde how are these men so blynded that they with the styffenecked Israelites do abhorre the lyuing breade of heauen, and do desyre  he flesh of Egypt, that is to say they do refuse Iesu Christe the very breade of heauen, & do huger after mennes doctrine and inue¯ted dr es, & after  isceyuable prophetes? But we wyl by the grace of god abyde by our lorde & maister Iesu Christ, & holde it vnd niable, that no vncleane doctrine whiche myghte be agaynst the gospel of our lorde Iesu Christ   maye be broughte in or suffered, but he alone muste be allowed, for he is lorde maister & Sauiour, & besydes him is none other. In summa we know of none other veritie, nor of none other waye, of none other lyfe, but onely of Iesu Christe. Iohn. xiiii. For thys cause yf there come any prophecies or visions that wil draw vs from this holsome doctrine of Iesu Christ they muste be accursed. Furthermore how and wyth what weapons that the christian shall fyghte, doth Paule clearelye teache vs to the Ephesians in the syxte Chapter wyth these wordes: Stande therfore and your loynes gyr ded about wyth the truth, hauyng on, the brest plate of rightuousenes, and shodde vpon your fete wyth the gospell of peace, that you maye be prepared, a oue all thynges take holde of the shelde of fayth, wher wyth ye may quentch the fyry dartes of the wycked, & take the helme of saluacion, and the sworde of he spirite, whyche is the worde of God. And Iohn sayth Al that is borne of god ouercometh the world. And thys is the victorye that ouercometh the worlde, euen our fayth. Who is it that ouercometh the worlde, but he that beleueth that Iesus is the sonne of God. Out of these wordes of Iohn maye all ryght christians wel vnderstande that the victorye standeth in an vpryghte fayeth, and not in anye carnall and outward  weapon. And we do holde it wyth the Apostle Iohn, and are also content wyth Paule, so that we wyl holde wyth them, all straunge doctrine whyche myght be contrary to the Gospell of Iesu Christe, for vtterly accursed. Gala. i.  Of Matrymonye. OF matrymonye we do hold now in the newe testament not after the wyl of Moyses nor after the ensampel of the patriat ches, but as god instytuted it in paradyse, and as it was restituted agayne of Chryste, and brought agayn to the fyrst institucion, namely that Matrimony is a ioynynge togyther of   persons, that is to say a man and a woman, af ter the wordes of the lord: They two shall be one fleshe. Genes. ii. And for this cause hath Paule commaunded the byshopes & deacons, euery one of the¯ to be a housband of one wyfe Out of the whiche texte muste nedes folowe, that no chrysten man may haue more then one wife, or els had Paule robbed the byshoppes and deacons of theyr comon chrystian lybertye, yea he had tangled them in a snare, which is vnpossyble. i. Cor. vi. so is it not to be fou¯de in any apostels wrytynge, that any Chrysten man in or after the apostels tymes hath bene Polygamus (that is to saye) hath had manye wyues. What yt the apostles haue not taught nor vsed, in theyr congregacyon, that shal not wee teache nor vse as an necessarye thinge  o mans saluacyon. For els muste it folowe that the apostels had not knowen nor taught all the trueh, which is against the words and promise of Iesu Christ, which promised to his apostels sayeng: when the conforter the holy ghoste shal come he shall teache you all the trueth. Ihon. xiiii. And Paul toke god to witnesse yt present day that he was pure from the bloud of al men for he had kept nothing backe but had shewed them all the cou¯sell of god, Acti. xx. Nowe is it well knowen that Paule taughte not that a Chrysten man shoulde haue many wyues, and   therfore it is not the counsell or wyll of God: but muche more is the counsel and wyl of god, that a christian shall haue but one wyfe. Seynge that all the newe Testament alway spea keth of one man and one wyfe, as appeareth by these chapirers. Mathewe. xix. Marke. x.  . Timothe. iii. Titu. i. i. Corhinth. vii. Ephe. v. And therfore can not we approue the Iewes Poligamians the whyche some haue begonne. But we holde vs after the ensample of Adam and Eue, and also in thys matter it is restitusted agayne by Christe. Mathew. xix. Marke. x. we are also wel contented with Paule, which doth saye that for auoydyng fornicacion euerye man shall haue his owne wyfe, and euerye woman her owne husbande Also that Matrimony is a soy ynge togyther of man and woman, after the worde of the Lorde: These two shall be one fleshe. Genesis. ii. Mathewe. xix. Marke. x. Ephesians. v.   Thys is the confession of oure fayth, in the which we hope that nothyng shal be fou¯de but the pure trueth of the Gospell, yf so be that it be not iudged after mannes good thynkynge, but onelye after the rule of thy Godlye worde. And notwythstandynge bycause that we wyll gyue no plase vnto the sclaunderers, that of a presumptuouse hygh mynded spirite myghte sclaunder or rayse vpon vs, we are alwayes readye, and offer our selues, that yf any christen man beyng learned in the scripture, can reproue vs wyth Goddes worde in anye thynge that shoulde fayle vs of the trueth, to hym we shall and wyll alwayes gladly as disciples vnto ther  maiste  gyue place, and gladly wyth all toy sulnesse of the spirite, recey e al   christen doctrine of hym. Seynge that Peter a prince of the Apostles muste suffer that he was rebulted of Paule, reasone it is that we shoulde suffer to be rebuked, yf we throughe mannes ignoraunce were fallen in erroure, we that are poore seruau¯tes of the Lorde, & skantly haue receyued one pounde, where as Peter had receyued fyue, the whyche our vnderstandyng is no more to be lykened to the high apostles wisdome, then a gnat by a camell. And we know also that Solomon sayth: Be not wyse in thyne owne conceyte. And agayne: He that refuseth to be refourmed, despiseth his owne soule, but he that submitteth hym selfe to correction is wyse. And for thys cause wyl we alwayes be diligent to heare, and with all m kenes submitte our selues vnto him, that coulde teach vs any doctrine, more agreable to the holy scripture: But yf any man wyll condempne our fayth without the iudgement of scripture & iudge it after the prouerbe: as the blinde iuggeth the colour, that muste & wyl we suffer for gods sake. Also yf any ma¯ wil be our Pharao and treade vs downe bicause yt we be Ilsraelites or fayne would be, in this wyl we aso co¯ fort vs wt the holy scripture, hoping yt our hea ue¯ly father shall haue mercy ouer vs, through Iesu Christ, & strength vs so wt his holy goste, yt we shal not care for the dreadful sclau¯der ouer our fayth. And we perceyuing yt blyndnes of the como¯ people, & the great tyranny of certe¯ princes, so yt the como¯ people are so blinded in their memory, yt they ca¯ not iudge the light from darkenes nor the right from vnrightuousnes or lyes from the truth, yea they crie ouer Iesu that be shalbe crucified, and Bara as shalbe let go.   And also dyuers prynces are so full of tyranny that they do persecute the chrysten, and wythout any mercy put them to the moste greuous and cruell death, not remembryng that the innocent bloude of the ryghtuouse Abell cryeth for vengeaunce, agaynste the murderer Cain, vnto God in heauen. Neuerthelesse the scripture must be ful illed, namely that all they that wyll lyue godly in Chryste Iesu, muste suffer p rsecucyon. And chryst sayth to his apostels: Haue they persecuted me, they shall also persecute you. And therfore saith Iohn in his epistle: Be old what loue the father hath shewed on vs, that we should be called his chylderne: Therfore the world doth not knowe you, bycause it knoweth not hym. With those and more other scriptures, maye wee comforte our selues, and especyallye wyth the wordes of Chryste, sayeng: Blessed are they that suffer persecucyon for ryghtuousnes sake, for theyrs is the kyngdom of heauen. Blessed are ye when men r uyle you and persecute you, and falsely say all maner euill sayenges agaynste you, for my names sake. Reioyse and be glad, for great is your rewarde in heauen And we praye god our heauenlye father, thorow oure lorde Iesu Chryste  the which out of his vnmeasurable mercye and grace, hathe gyuen vs a cleare vpryght f yth, that he kepe and reserue vs forth in thys peryllous tyme, frome all false doctrynes of the mynisters of the hellish Sathan And that we thorowe the Aungells coloure, which they often tymes haue vpon them, may not be per erted to  aue the trueth of god And forther e do wee praye vnto the lorde. that he wyll so strength and fortyfye vs with   his holy gooste, that we do not ware wery of s sufferynge persecution for the ryghtuousnesset sake: but that we maye be able to stande in all dreadfull sclaunder, and tyrannous persecucions of the wycked Antechristes spirites, yea and that we rather, yf it be neade suffer thys bodely death, byding in our fayth, then we shoulde forsake it, and dye eternally. From the which eternal death the Lorde God preserue   them that loue and seke hym wyth all theyr hert through Iesu Christe our Sauiour. To whom be laude, prayse, honour, ma estie, and dominion, for euer. Amen.