THE COPY OF A LETTER, LATELY WRITTEN BY A SPANISHE GENTLEMAN, TO HIS freind in England: in refutation of sundry calumnies, there falsly bruited, and spred emonge the people. GOOD Sir, and courteous freinde, since the tyme of my late deliuery from captiuitie, I haue often called to mynde, hovv desirous I founde you, to vnderstand the truthe of our intention, thoughe litle doubtfull of the iustnesse of our cause: but seing the suspitious Iealousy of guilty conscyences, permitted not such conuersation as accordeth vvith humaine curtesy: and that free speach is theare so fatr intolerable, that men are examyned by torture, not ouly of there indifferent vvoordes, but euen of their very thoughtes, and future actions, I vvished oportunitie to giue you satisfaction, but vsed silence, to auoyde your trooble. Well, seing it hathe since pleased God, to lend me lyf, liberty, and meanes to send vnto you (vvhich in so dangerous and vvatchfull a vvorld is moste difficill to be founde) I could not omitt to vvrite at this present, vvhereby your self, and such others, as to vvhome you may vvith safty communicate it, may be the better satisfied. It is to you very apparent, and vvel knovvne to the vvhole vvorld, hovv it hathe of late pleased God, to dispose of mens actions, according to his ovvne pleasure: vvhich vve vvill rather accepte as a punishment for our sinnes, then take for a discouragement   to our cause. Neither can our enimyes therein, receaue any occasion to be the more insolent, or to glory, in that they deserue not, sithe theire valour, neuer made our enterprise frustrate: themselues confessing, it vvas not donne by the puisance of man, but by the povver of God: vvhich they let not to say, may giue sufficient proof of their cause: not seeming to remember, hovv sundry examples can giue testimony, of diuers attempts misfortuned at the first, that aftervvard haue succeded vvel: And of all others, that that of the children of Israell is the moste notable: They being comaunded, at tvvo seuerall tymes, by God himself, to make vvar against the tribe of  Beniamin, Iudic. cap. 20.  vvere notvvithstanding at bothe those tymes ouerthrovvne, vvho yet at the laste preuailed, to the great foile and confusion of there enimyes. And to giue you an example neerer home, you may reade, Polid. Virgil.  hovv the expedition that  Iulius Ceaser  made into England, not for that the Britaines had assisted his rebells robbed his treasure, or entruded themselues into his dominions: but only for that they had aydid the frenche, vvhen he made vvar against them: came at the first to no effect, yet vvere those Britaines no vvhit the more assured of securitie, for the yeare follovving he returned againe, and gat the victorie. God hathe punished vs for our sinnes vvhich are great, but the punishment of our faultes, excuseth not your far greater offences, your superiours must vvel knovve they haue deserued a plague, and their guilty consciences greatly feare to fynde it, hovvsoeuer they strugle and striue against God, as did Nemrode, vvhen vvith his  Giants  he buylded   the tovvre of  Babilon, Gene. cap.  thincking there vvas no other way to ouerthrowe there designementes, then a newe inundation. Vaine are those persuasions of theirs, that our losses are irrecouerable, and that there remaineth for vs, neither hope nor comforte. Which yf it were so, yet are not they freed from deserued vengeance, and that it is not so, a litle tyme can make manifest. Such speaches only argue, that they haue made a resolution to run on in all impiety, and to trie to the vttermoste, vvhether Gods puisance or their vngodly practises can moste preuaile: vvhere in they shall vvell fynde, that he can many wayes confounde the vvicked, vvhen themselues shall no vvay preuent it. Meane vvhyle, there outvvarde courage is mixte vvith invvarde care, and there fayned Ioy vvith restlesse iealousy: vvho in seeming to feare nothing, are seene to start at their ovvne shadovves. This intolerable feare is more manifested in your Englishe Gouernment, then in any state els in the vvhole vvorld: the great impression thereof enforcing them, to all their spyings abroade, and inquisitions at home: searchings of houses more at midnighte then at noone dayes, apprehensions, examinations, and such daily exercise, and practise of the racke,  as neuer the like vvas hard of: still fynding by experience, that neuer more labour hathe bin employed to lesse purpose, those innocents only able to confesse no more, then that vvhich co¯cerneth their ovvne religion and conscience: notvvithstanding all vvhich, the remedies remaining (rather to patche vp the state of a body so far infected, then to cure an incurable disease) are principally   grounded, vpon extreme tyranny, and deepe dissimulation. Their tyranny is chiefly extended, to the Catholiques of your owne country, of whome very many before, and sundry since our disastre, they haue cruelly executed: and by false lying libells after there deathes, haue soughte to insinuate that they vvere of conspiracie vvith vs,  albeit it pleased God to discouer this their great iniustice, euen in the very execution thereof, for tvvo of that nomber vvich vvere nexte after condemned to deathe for treason, condescending throughe frailty, to recant their religion, vvere forthvvith pardoned, and restored to libertie. Which benefyte of lyf, all the others mighte aswell and as easely haue enioyed as they, yf the grace of God, had not in them bin the greater. Which euidently argueth for vvhat cause they vvere condemned, since recantation from treason, after or afore condemnation to death, I neuer knevve could saue a mannes lyf, yf himself list. Touching their dissimulation, being the grounde and substance of their, gouernment, and conteyning the infynite nombers of deceatfull practises, false fictions, and slaunderous lies, vvhich asvvell in the vvorld abroade, as also at home, they haue artificially exercysed, in euery action, is suche a laborinthe to looke into, that it vvould rather require a vvhole volume, then a brief relation. I vvil there fore leaue the nomber of those vnto such as by longe experience, haue made better obseruation then my self: & for breuitie only sett dovvne, some fevve notable examples of their vntrue speaches, familiar to your selues, vvherevvith they haue   foughte to make odious to the people, to calumniate and condemne, such as themselues pleased. By vvhich fevve you may receaue lighte to looke into the others, and to giue such credit to the like hereafter, as experience hathe prooued, the former to deserue. It may therefore please yon (amonge many late rumours of the lyke condition and qualitie) to cal to remembrance vvhat dispytefull pamphlets, and odious reportes, vvere bruited against the late duke of  Northfolke,  but you may vvel assure your self, that neuer any one man of sence belieued, that the said Duke euer intended, to haue fyred  London  in fovvre places. You haue hard of images of vvax hidden in the earthe, vvhereof bothe bookes and ballettes vvere spred aboute the country, that this vvas don by Catholiques, to consume the Queene, and some other: for the vvhich cause, one  Hardinge  a protestant minister of Islington vvas apprehended, charged that he vvas a Papist, moste cruelly racked, and vniustly condemned to death. And yon haue vnderstood aftervvard, that one Elkes another protestant, confessed himself to haue bin the doer there of: yet not to destroy the Queene, but to obtaine the loue of some Londoners vvyf. So likevvise of that other shamful and ridiculous rumour, raised against sundry honnorable Gentlemen, vvhich being a litle to folishly handled by the accusers at the begining, The like vvas since b ched by M. stafford but t  vvoold not take.  vvas for very shame in the end, lett fall and syncke avvay. Notvvithstanding it vvas most terrible for the tyme, to heare tell, that the Queene, and the vvhole Courte, should haue bin blovvne vp vvith gonnpovvder,   vvhich vvas said to be conueyed thether in trunckes, and stravved vnder the rushes. An infynite nomber of suche like blazes haue bin made, amonge vvhich, the often kylling of the Queene, and the sundry plotts for the fyring of London, are no meane may-games. But hovv false and fayned soeuer they vvere, there turnes thereby haue bin serued to such purpose, that it hathe extended, euen to the losses of the liues and landes, of many of greatest vertue and honnour, in the whole Realme, Such deuis  haue se ued to exting   he the Auncient nobil .  vvhose innocencies and vniuste suffrings, equytie and truthe, attend tyme to discouer, hovv confidently soeuer in the meane vvhyle, vntruthes are reported: hovv generally they may happen to be belieued, and hovv daungerous it be for any man in their first aduancement, any vvay to insinuate the contrary. The vviser sorte vvell seing by experience, vvhereunto all tendeth, are so sufficiently vvarned by others harme, that they dare not but seeme to say and soothe, vvhatsoeuer is agreeable to the humours of their superiours. Wel knovving that any ly, be it neuer so absurd, must receaue free passage, yf so be, it fetche his first originall from the Courte. But to dravve to my intended purpose, and to come to that, which concerneth the honnour of my owne soueraigne, the  Kinge Catholique  of  Spaine:  In those particulers whereupon I knovv you expect my awnsvvere, of vvhose myld and sweete proceedings, albeit the whole vvorld hathe seene sufficient proof: vvhose very nature abhorreth rigour, and vvhose compassionate mynde neuer seeketh reue¯ge: vvho pardoneth such offences, that to much mercy is rather his faulte, then to seuere   iustice: and forgiueth the greatest contempts, that subiects can comitt against there soueraignes: yet is he not free from the venemous tonges of stinging vipers, nor exempt from the lying libells of the malitious Englishe. Pardon me good Sir, that I speake of your nation as I haue cause, meaning only those that haue giuen the same: the foule mouthes of your ministers neuer spared to raile against his Catholique Maiesty, nor no contemptible rascall, to reuile him at his pleasure, nothing vvas more frequent then the defaming of my Kynge, nor nothing omitted that might make him most odious. It vvas made a very cleare case,  that you should all haue bin broughte vnder the bondage of straungers. Who had deuyded your country amonge them, & alotted to themselues, the landes and lyuings, of all the nobilitie and Gentlemen of the Realme: That your wyues and daughters should be violated. That we broughte irons to mareke your Children vnder the age of seauen yeares, to the end they mighte be knowne, to be come of the people of a Conquered country. And that your Goods should be robbed and taken from you, &c. To ansvvere all which (since you somtyme vrged me, when the tyme nothing serued to giue you satisfaction) I am novv to desire you, firste to consider, that the question vvhether his  Catholique Maiesty,  hathe iuste cause or not, to make vvar against England, is so cleare a case, that no man honest and vvise, can in his conscience doubte thereof. And yf vve looke back into former tymes, vve shall fynde great vvarres, inuasions, and conquests, achiued for farr lesse matters, then the longe taking parte vvith his rebells, or a nomber of other Englishe iniuries, that can giue sufficient cause vnto our Kynge,   all vvhich sinister dealings, haning bin long shadowed, & shrovvded vnder egregious dissimulations, are now lastly broken oute, into moste open & apparent iniustice, in the sighte of all the vvorld: and in such foule and shamlesse manner, as is odious to all honest myndes: by filching and stealing of his treasure on the one syde, by sneaking, and encroaching, into his tovvnes and countries, on the other syde: all after a very vile and theevis he fassion. Hauing gayned by force, no one tovvne they hold, not skarsly defended and kepte by valour, such as his maiesties forces hathe besieged: althonghe by treachery, periuty, At Bergues  .  and coosinage, they hauesomtyme preuented intended exploits. The iniuries then that his Maiesty hathe receyued, beeing so many, and so manifest, that long since he hathe had cause to attempte that, where vnto of latter tymes, he hathe bin more and more pronoked. It  esteth to regard, vvhether this cause be giuen him, by the superiours or subiects. That it should proceede from the people, noman can deeme, that it comes from the prince, noman can deny. Whether the reuenge of the faultes of a fewe, should generally extend to the vtter ruyne, & subuersion of a vvhole nation, no reason can proue: neither hathe such reuenge bin alvvaies comon to pagans and infidells, muche lesse once ment by a Christian king, and most clement prince. Looke vvhether his proceedings haue bin tyrannous, tovvard any of his ovvne subiects: and vvhether euer any haue entred into more outragious rebellions, then those of the lovve countries, vvho after there longe misdemeamour, did at the lenghte euen vtterly renounce & abiure him: receyued the Duke   of  Alençon  of  fraunce,  inuested him into the Duchie of  Brabant,  and svvare vnto him obedience. All vvhich actions of theirs, hauing had suche successe, as commonly ensueth the equity of such causes: and many of their cities, since reduced vnto his Maiesties obedience, no one man of them all, hathe for any his former offences bin executed. Truthe it is, that the Duke of Alua, did heretofore vse some seueritie tovvards them, yet not other then they had deserued, and for one executed by him, your iustice of England vvould haue hanged an hundreth, yf the like case had bin theirs. But notvvithstanding that this vvas donne, by due and lawfull iustice, yet vvas it so farr disagreable to his Maiesties mynde, that the said Duke beeing called into  Spaine:  of all the Gouernours vvhich since that tyme haue bin sent thether, no one, nor they all, haue vsed any thing lyke, the lyke seueritie: albeit there offences since, There cheifest cause of rebellion vvas for heresy, vvhich no  ne of their preuileges alovved.  haue so farr exceeded there faultes afore, as the taking of armes (in defence of their priuileges, as they then vntruly spake) is different from the denying there soueraigne, & electing another. Yet such grace and fauour do they fynde, eue¯ at this day, that yeilding the¯selues, and their cities vnder his obedience: they are not only absolutely pardoned, As those of S. Ger   enbreg, &c.  but vvhich is more meruelous, they are vvith great summes of mony ritchly revvarded. And such subiects of his, that as rebells do yet remaine out vnpardoned, are themselues the cause thereof, because they seeke it not. It is further to be considered, that there is no Kynge in  Europe,  that hathe more different nations, of more diuers landes & languages to his subiects, then his Maiesty hathe. The entire Monarchie of    Spaine,  conteyning sundry kyngedomes, is gouerned in one moste flourishinge and peaceable estate, and the Prouince of  Portugall,  newly anexed there vnto, remaineth in more better condition, then it was in other tymes afore. The nobilitie thereof, notwithstanding some resistance at the first, after that they had maturely considered the cause, together with his maiesties mercyfull disposition, & lefte of to preferr the pretence of Don  Anthonio:  were not only receiued into his great grace and fauout, and confirmed in their owne auncient possessions, but were further gratifyed by his Maiesty, with sundry great honours and dignities. And the comon people eftsoones released of many great taxes and tributes, that their former princes had imposed vppon them. He hathe of  Italians,  those of the Kyngdomes of  Napl s  and  Sicilia,  the duchie of  Millan,  and of diuers Iles of the  Mediterraneum  sea. He hathe  Germaines,  of the Duchie of  Luxembourge:  And  Burgundians,  of the higher prouince: beeing all gouerned in great quyet, and farr better estate, then euer vnder any other, their former Princes. Hauing found no conquest, thraldome, mutation, or inconuenience whatsoeuer to auoy them but fully enioy the comfortes and comodities of their countries, vnder the obedience of such a soueraigne, as hathe more better mighte & meanes to defend them, then any Prince his people in the world, moste free and farr from any lykelyhoode of rebellion. In which same obedience, his subiects of the Netherlandes, had doubtlesse longe liued, had they not bin situate so neere the noysome infection of their Englishe neighbours, whose   pernitious venim, hathe not only anoyed them, but also Fra ce, and Scotland, the nexte inhabitants on the  ther sydes: And whose malice so exceedeth, were th r  meanes according, that they would not leaue, neither Europe nor India, free from such infection. And for a further proof, of his Maiesties mylde nature, and   benignitie, I shall desire you to con der, that there is nothing that can possibly, more moue and stir vp the indignation of a Prince, then the open disloyall and repugnant insolency, of his owne people. And that no subiects in our dayes, haue exceeded his, all the vvorld will witnesse. Notwithstanding all which, looke whether any bloudy, cruel, or vnchristian desire of reuenge, hathe apeered in him, and looke whether it be possible that more lenity mighte be shewed vnto such, then his Maiesty hathe donne. The truthe whereof, beeing so apparent, plaine & manifest, I leaue vnto your owne self in co¯scye¯ce to discerne whether thease examples of his Maiesties proceedings, will not sufficiently awnswere, vnto all the calumnies and lies, that his aduersaries can possibly inuent to make him odious. Looke whether after such a generall reuolt wherein so many had so iustly deserued to loose bothe their liues, & liuings, whether their  lands  are deuyded to  straungers,  there  wyues violated,  their  Children marcked with hot Irons, there goods robbed and taken from them,  &c. Or rather, whether they do not liue in all securitie and quiet possession of their owne. And yf by reason of the restrainte of their trafique they are not presently in their former aboundance, they may wholly impute that vnto you, beeing the only   cause theerof. But of the like compassion had of a Prince on his people, yon cannot shevve any examples paste or present, in the whole world. This Sweete and gratious disposition of his Maiesty, beeing so publyke, & notorious, how is it possible, that euer such vnchristi  cruelty, could more be intended to the Englishe nation, then to any others: or that any man offence can imagine, why he should more hate them, then any his owne treacherous and rebellious subiects. His great wisdome well seeing, and obseruing, that the originall of this rancour, principally proceedeth from some fewe in present aucthoritie, whose vngratious designes are executed by persons, neither of honour, nor honesty. And others of the vulgar sorte of people, who with applause of their superiours, concurr in thease courses: he can well discerne, rather to do it of litle discretion, then of great malice: themselues not beeing of capacitie, to consider the equitie, or iustnesse of the cause. And his Maiesty espetially considereth, that great multytudes, are ouer borne, by the impious tyranny, of powrable persons, ontwardly to condescend to that, which inwardly they contemne: sustayning contrary to the nature of so noble a Nation, the generall reproche of particuler mens dishonorable actions: whose case doubtlesse, he dothe rather pittie, then desire to punish. All the world knoweth that his Maiesty hathe euer had a most singuler affection to the Englishe people, and your selues by experience haue perfectly found it. There could neuer kynge condescend to conditions more honorable & profitable for you, then his Maiesty did at his beeing in England.   I suppose monsieur of fraunce, in his late mocke mariage, neuer offred you the like. His Maiesties actions were withoute dissimulation, as the consequence well declared, for beeing maried to your Queene, and proclaymed Kynge, yet soughte not to setle himself in the Crowne: nor to possesse any portes, townes, or castells, in the whole countrie. But after the deceasse, of the moste vertuous Queene  Mary  his wyf, gaue place and quyet entrance vnto the Lady  Elizabeth.  Giuing also vnto her, all his said wyues Iewells, which himself mighte iustly haue claymed and kepte. And presently after her coming to the crowne, he then being vpon conditions to conclude a peace with the frenche kynge, vppo¯ the taking of  S. Quintines,  did moste earnestly stick, at the re¯dringe of the towne of  Calis,  to the Englishe againe: she hauing at that present her ambassadors there, and as it seemed, for the same purpose, but after his Maiesty had so earnestly vrged this matter, that vnlesse it mighte be graunted there could be no accorde the french then flatly confessed, that notwithstanding the Englishe ontwardly solicited for  Calis:  yet they had secretly assured them, that their Queene cared not therefore: which his Maiesty afterward founde so in dede, and perceaued the fraude, that it imported. But to leaue thease deuyses, to other like dooble dealings, let vs returne to the tyme, when our Kinge remained with you in England: and see with what affable curtesy he entreated you, what great liberalitie he vsed to all sortes in generall, and what honorable pensions he gaue to all your Noble men in particuler, with infinyte other fauours: among all which, the sauing of this womans lyf, who beeing comitted,   and in case to be condemned, not for religion, for she had and hard Masse, First vvith  .  pretending to be Catholique: After vvith others, as the letters found   her testified.  but for conspiringe of treason, and rebellion, against her soueraigne, and sister: was  benefyte (as it seemeth) not best bestovved, b ause it hathe bin woorst requyted, sundry other signes of his moste affectionate fauour, hath he sh wed to your nation: and of all others the great st is, that he hathe had so longe patience, to reuenge so many iniuries, as from thence he hathe receyued, Notwithstanding all those, he hathe euer contyn ued his princely, benignity, neuer hurti g nor hating, the good for the euill, but relieuing nombers with very large entretainements, who hauing abandoned, the comodities of their country, for their conscyence, and religion, haue   themselues to liue in his dominions. Yea his bounty and beneuolence, in very meere giftes, and liberalities, to sundry nations in generall, are so great: that he freely giueth away by the yeare, more then the Queene of England can yearely dispend. What should I be tedious to stand vppon those points, that his enemyes intend, to haue bin his intention: or the termes of tyranny, that euery hedge minister, can amplyfy against vs. That you should all haue bin broughte vnder the bondage of strangers, who had made deuision of your lands and lyuings amonge themselues, as thoughe all  Spaine,  and  Portugall,  the  Indies,  east and west,  Italy,  and the  lowe Countries,  yea almoste half the world, were so pestred with people: that there were no habitation lefte for vs, but that we must needes by daunger of sea and land, seeke to take it from you perforce: whereas you may well   knowe, there hathe no necessitie constreyned vs, to abandon our landes, and liuings, in our owne naturall and ample country of  Spaine,  which we prefer before any  septentrionall  region. And albeit we were enforced to change our residence, yet can we make choise of many places, as frutefull and pleasant as England is, and obtaine them, with farr lesse difficulty. It may be, that this persuasion of danger to loose there landes, hathe moued sundry of your gentlemen of late dayes, to sell away theirs, and to purchase more assured credit, haue sett themselues forvvard in great brauery, to be seene in your seruice, for the which I doubte not, but they haue bin rewarded  with kynde courtly countenances: and are in possibilitie, so soone as occasion shall require, Protections are the best revvards that they are to expect.  with easy sute (for there full recompence) to obtaine protections, that no officer shall arrest them, when they shall haue lesse mony then land. Your impudent ministers, whose mouthes are made the trompets, to sounde oute vntruthes: can tell you as confidently, as had they bin of the Kynges counsell, into what great bondage you should haue bin broughte, and how-much you liberty, should haue bin abridged. Maruell not that these companions, call your reformation a conquest: and condemne the moste Clement Kynge of the world, of intended cruellty it behoueth them moste, to speake in this matter, and to exercyse to the vttermoste, the loudnes of their lying, because it concerneth aswell their owne benefyte, as those from whome they receaue their instructions, perhapps in deede, the large liberty that they take to them selues had bin somwhat abridged, & many a    Royall  and  Noble  sermon lefte vnmade, The ordinary prices of sermons.  wherewith thease wedded priests of  Baal,  do maintaine their women, and new generation. This bondage semeth to be the more grieuous, because it is said to be vnder straungers: would to God there were lesse difference, betweene Christian and Christian, and more discord, betwene  Englishe, The rebelles   Flaunders.  and  Turke,  you haue not had so fewe, as fyfty thowsand straungers amonge you, more then twenty yeares together, and therefore you mighte the better beare, a smaller number. That your wyues and daughters should be deflowred, is a matter, that more men then ministers cannot brooke, and yet seldome amonge soldiers not guyded by good disciplyne, this plague in particuler is incident, but hereunto can I tell you, that your liberty of the late Gospell hathe prouyded a more sufficient remedy, to auoyde this inco¯uenience, then any other: insomuch that such of the soldiers themselues, as were so ill disposed, could tell, that they should fynde harlots more then enoughe, alredy prouided. Those tirrible tales, that we broughte Irons wherewith to marke your Children, vnder the age of seauen yeares, to the end they mighte be knowne, to be the race of a conquered nation, do doubtlesse sounde moste lamentably: but to comforte you herein, thus much may I say, that albeit a man do vtterly refuse to belieue them, I dare warrant him, he shall neuer be damned, for that incredulitie: but by the way I could wishe you to note, that yf they did not thinke they had framed the people to belieue what they list they would neuer feede them with such palpable vntruthes,   and yf therefore you shall thinke them, to haue as litle honesty, as they thinke you to haue witt, you shall do them no iniury at all. That your goods should be robbed and taken from you, you neede not greatly feare, for it semeth that now of late, more then here-tofore, her Maiesties collectours and receyuers, haue taken such order to take it from you, to saue it from vs: that they haue sent it oute of England to Zealand, and other places ouer the seas, wherefore you needed not feare this misery: but rather haue hoped, that Spanish pistolets, should haue bin more comon and currant in England, then euer they were afore. To the other ridiculous, and friuolous forgeries, that we broughte halters to hange you, and whips to whip you, I can say litle, other then that I am very sory, that in all this ample prouision, we forgat to bring whetstones to giue to those that told you this, and bables for such as did belieue them. But to leaue all such absurd lies, to the wisdomes of the creditors, it is more necessary to see whereunto they serued, & whether theire further meaning, may thereby be made manifest. The truthe is, and easely it dothe appere, that they were not only inuented, to make them moste odious, that ment you least euill: but also to blynde and bleare, the eyes of the people, by putting into there heades, the feares of future miseries, to the end they should the lesse behold, there owne present calamyties, and those that by their improuident practises are sure to ensue, albeit they neuer had neede to feare any forraine enimy: but to leade dryue and dispose of you, as of brute beasts, withoute   soules, sence, or vnderstanding: where & to what, themselues like and allowe, euer prouyding to keepe you in ignorance, and principally of that, which moste concerneth your owne comon welfare: as amonge others it plainely appeereth, in the prohibiting vnder great paine, & deuising of othes of association, that none may once moue, or call in question to knowe, who is to succede their Queene, after her deathe: as thoughe it were treason to say she should die, or an insufferable cryme to knowe that, whereof they mighte receaue comforte, of continuing their owne quyet, after her decease. And as thoughe they desyred all felicity to end with them, not caring what confusion, ciuill discention, and bloudshedd, mighte afterward fall amonge the Englishe, by the Englishe themselues. A resolution doubtlesse moste indurable, and vnchristian: vnnaturall is that father, that throughe inordinate auarice, leaueth his family to fall to all discorde and discention. But impious is that prince, that in preseruing disordered pleasure, leaueth the people in such possibilitie to be killed, in the confusion of so many competitours. But lett vs looke into lesse matters then thease, and see whether they deny not, the very priuileges of reasonable creatures, prohibiting by publyke comaundement, that none may once aske or enquyre, how thinges do ordinarily passe in the world abrode. Neither to demaunde, heare, read, or write, any newes of any matter whatsoeuer, be it true or vntrue: yea scarsly of that, which toucheth mens priuate negotiations. The only restrayning of which free speech, is of it self a very   euydent and sufficient signe, of a Tyrannous estate, and a markable suspition, of sinister dealing. By this brydle you are rayned and broughte, to all beastly & slauishe seruytude, withoute any knowledge or consideration, either of reason, cause, or conscyence, of that wherein bothe your bodies and soules are employed: and somuch of your substancontributed, which to the menaginge of thease vniust quarrels haue bin so great and so grieuous, that it hathe exceeded all the former subsidies and exactions, that any seauen of your princes predecessours, haue had of their subiects, to make their lawfull warres. You pay, what they please to demau¯de, you beare what they list to lay vppon you, you are made to say and soothe, to whatsoeuer they will, be it neuer so false, fonde, and vnlykely: you are pressed, compelled, vnpaied, clapte vnder hatches, and caryed you knowe not where, nor to what end, & when such of you as are lefte aliue, do returne home againe (yf not caryed sick throughe the streats of London by whole carte loades, in the Lord of Lecester his  Trophee ) you see how you are rewarded, and how your creditt and condition is encreased, by that it was afore. You are cutt of from all trade and trafique, with the moste ritche, and opulent countries aboute you, retaining no hope of any outward comoditie, other then can be gotten by robbery and piracie. The prosperitie whereof you fynde such, that you see your selues no whitt thereby disburdened, of any your encreasing subsidies, and exactions. This great misery and dayly desolation, dothe more and more make, your  Gentlemen  bare, and your  Marchants  banckrupte, it consumeth the    Comons,  and continually wasteth the wealth of the Realme: As wisemen do see, thoughe they dare not say it, and all men do fynde, thoughe they do not see it. It would exceede the compasse of a letter, to lay open vnto you euery important affliction, but that shall not neede, for experience will teach you to descerne them, each day more then other, and you shall further feele the smart, before you fynde the remedy. Wo woorthe the causers of your calamities, who for their owne priuate ambitious desire to rule, haue run on, in all desperate and dangerous attempts whatsoeuer: and haue lastly by violence, drawne vppon their owne heades, that which neither the¯selues, nor the whole Realme can vphold. Where are now those infallible groundes, that your great  Machiauelist,  laide downe at the begining, when he so boldly presumed to alter religion, and to begin his new Gospell, with an extraordinary gouernement, whose resolutions to continew the Republique, were according to the direction of the vnholy Ghoste, in the determyninge of religion. The first was, to establishe their estate, by maintayning rebellions of the subiects of  France, Flaunders,  and  Scotlande. That failing, the second was, by the credit that they had in the lowe Countries, to giue and transpose parte thereof to the frenche: and thereby to kindle a warr, betweene the two houses, of fraunce and Spaine. This failing, then to ioyne with, and to giue portes and succours, to all pirates, to vex and anoy the said two houses, yf they should ioyne. And lastly, thease all failing, there was one remedy left to redresse all againe: which was, by the new singing, of an old maingy  Masse:  so vilely it pleased him to terme the moste blessed Sacrifice of the Churche, where by the way, you haue here to note the religion of an  Athiest. I am enforced for breuitie, to lay downe vnto you, when, where, and in what manner, thease plottes haue bin put in practyse: neither shall I now greatly neede to stand thereon, for to the woonder of the world, the annoyance of their neighbours, the ignominy of themselues, and the imminent danger of the whole Realme, the three former (perhapps corrected, & augmented, by the authour) haue bin very orderly effectuated, the last remedy only remayning. All which plottes and practises, tyme & truthe, hauinge ouerworne and discouered: you are now to consider, what benefites they haue broughte vnto you. And therefore looke into what state and condition you are now lefte, and to what hope and possibilitie you are deliuered: see first, whether themselues, in their hoary heares, are not full of feare and perplexitie, whether the people be not generally in pouertie and decay, The Englishe pract    Tur kes & other infid s aga st Christendome.  and the Realme in restlesse tourmoile and trouble: And being abandoned of all exteriour comforte, whether any one powrable Christian prince, knowing your cause, dothe compassionate your case, and lastly looke, whether you are not lefte to retyre, to  Turckes, Moores,  and  Barbarians,  for succour. The Kyngdomes of  Scotland, Denmarcke, Swethen,  and sundry states of  Germany,  that maintaine opinions, contrary to the  Catholique  aith,  from the   which they are falne, and in the which, the moste parte of Christendome dothe remaine: are not in any such feare: either of forreyne or domesticall daungers. They make not such ordinary exclamations, and false allarmes, of treason and treachery, neither do they thereupon, Tyrannously practise to cutt of, and kill, whome they please: for albeit that they are almoste as farr infected, with as foule heresies, yet haue they muche more morrall honesty: their heresy hauing only hurte themselues, and they not seeking the hurt of others. They haue not supported the rebellions of other subiects against their soueraignes, neither haue they practised with  Pagans  or  Turckes: They made fiers and feasts for ioy vpon the murther of the Queene of Scotland.  they haue quartered no  priests,  nor Murthered no Queenes, nor made triumphes of ioy & victory, vpon the committing of moste monstrous iniustice, neither by any other publike barbarous vilanies, broughte themselues in such dread and distresse. And that it may more better appeere vnto you, how your dealings, are lyked and allowed, of other protestant princes: it is not impertinent to my purpose, to giue you one example. At such tyme as it was bruited abroade, that your. Queene had resolued to entrude herself into his Maiesties dominions, a marchant of the lowe Countries, arryuing at  Stockholme,  was demaunded of the Kynge of  Swethen,  whether it were true that the Queene, of  England  had put herself in possession of any the Kynge of  Spaine  his countries, or townes there, yea quoth he it is true: Then quoth the Kynge, she hathe euen stakte downe her owne crowne, and standes in faire possibilitie, to be put out of all. Methinkes your self, or any indifferent Englishe   protestant, whose zeale dothe not ouerbeare his discretion, may muche maruell, that England so much and so many wayes seeming to be troobled, is so litle pittied of other people in the world abroade. And beeing gouerned by a woman, your case muste be the more capable of pittie, seeing men naturally are giuen, to compassionate that sexe. But alas my good freind, you may see these false faces dismasked long since, and all the world, to be aswell acquainted with Englishe clamours, as is the fysher of  Nylus,  with the teares of the Crocodile. Neither can any of those vaine, false, & lying libells, that from thence are spred abroade, any whit now a dayes serue your turnes, other then to noosell vp those, that you can keepe from seeing or hearing the contrary, for how cuningly soeuer the couloured woordes therein are contriued, men make your actions the comentaries. In the durance of your expyred yeares, your prince enioyed the fulnesse of her pleasure, and her fauorytes their vncontrouled aucthoritie, then advancinge their felicitie, and vsing all benefytes of tyme: after all which, you now rest doubtfull, whether your play will conclude, as a comedy, or tragedy: the truthe of all felicitie beeing tryed at the last, and no assured happynesse afore the end. When I enter into consideration, of the present state of your country, I call to remembrance, that at my beeing at  Salamanca,  some fyue yeares paste, an Englishe Gentleman shewed me, the woorke of an old Englishe poet, beeing the moste renowmed, that euer wrote in the Englishe tounge: in the begining whereof were certaine verses, which in manner of a prophesy, so perfectly discribed then,   the future state of England, that at this day, it is the very liuely pourtraict thereof  ad Viuum.  I requested of him the sence in Spanishe, and the meeter in Englishe, which is thus. VVhen faith faileth, in priests savves, And lords hestes, are held for lavves, And robbery is reckned purchase, And leachery is counted solace: Then shall the land of  Albion, Be broughte to great confusion. Althoughe I haue hard, that by the new lawes of England, it is made a trespasse, no lesse then treason, to talke of old prophesies: yet haue I presumed to repeat thease English rymes, because they are comon to be redd, in publyke printed bookes amonge your selues. That the authour had the spirite of prophesy I will not say, but how this accordeth with the present tyme, your self shall see. First touchinge the failing of the faith, it is manifest that he ment no other, then the faith Catholique, which had so lo¯ge lasted, & so vniuersally bin belieued: and was there then preached & taughte by priests, for ministers at that tyme were vnmade and created: which faith is now failed in those apostataes, from whence your ministers fetche their original: diuers of them being yet lyuing, that somtyme said  Masse  in the Catholique Churche, and do nowe say Comunion in the protestant congregation. The effect of which great defect of faith, hathe in a short season so sufficiently appeered, not only in the encreasing companies, of many sortes of protestants, puritanes,   Anabaptistes, and louing families, but euen in the bringing foorthe of sundry such monsters, as dare boldly deny our sauiour  Christ  himself: As Ham  Levvis Cole. Kett, &c.  whereby you may see, that forsaking the faith that contemned all heresy, you haue embraced a doctrine, that conteyneth all blasphemy. Euery man in his owne particuler experience, hathe had such infynite examples, of your notable corruption of English iustice, that he seeith, it is better to haue a bad cause, supported by the fauour of the courte, then a good cause, withoute the credit of a courtier: The aucthoritie of those lordes, hauing of late dayes extended so far, Extreme violating of Iustice.  as to the discharging of suche oute of prison, as haue lyen vpon executions, leauing their creditours vnsatisfied. Suche was the soueraigne puisance, of the late Lorde of  Lecester, D. Iulio, &c.  that he could not only extinguishe his owne manifest murthers, and open iniustice, but his Lord-ships will was a lawe sufficient, Those that had indebted themselues by his seruice of Holand he revvarded aftervvard vvith protections.  to defend the faultes of others: and his great plenty of protections, of more force then vertue.  Mony, mighte,  and  fauour,  doe so sway the iustice of England, and so alter the condition of euery case, that more wilfull murthers, capitall fellonies, and criminall offences are now pardoned, then euer afore. The iudge can tell, the  ury vvhether the Queene vvill haue the accused found guilty or not.  There are none that can liue, whome they list to kill: nor none can offend, whome they please to fauour. Truthe it is, that there is nothing punished more then vertue, nor nothing permitted more then vice. There is no blasphemy comparable to the denyall of feminine supremacy, nor no offence against God, so grieuously punished. There is no deathe so terrible, as that which is ordayned for deuoutest Christians, nor nothing more   offensyue, then the faithe of their forfathers: who yf they were aliue and Catholiques, their children would condemne, and quarter for traytours. According to your good Religion, and wel ordered lawes, the rest of your actions, do rightly concurr: and your open allowance of rapyne and robbery, dothe manifest to the world, that you haue made a resignation of all honnour, and abandoned all honesty: not caring what the whole world present, not all posterities to come, shall accompte of your actions: the blot & blemishe thereof, beeing so reprochefull, that England somtyme so famous, for vertue and iustice, is now esteemed a receptacle for pyrates, The greater parte of the nations maritines in all Europe, haue    obbed by the English.  and a den of theeues. And those litle companions, that are there dayly hanged for tryfles, beeing suche (for the moste parte) as your selues haue robbed first, by employing them in your seruice, withoute giuing them their payes, wherein hauing consumed their owne substance, are afterward enforced to steale, for the very maintenance of lyf: Are not hanged somuch for the facte, as for the manner of comitting it, for yf they did it, in any place oute of England, were it neuer so farr westward, nor neuer somuch in value, it should be reckned very righte and lawfull purchase. And they should be so farr from the danger of hanging, that they should be rewarded with the dignity of knyghthoode. As Sir Frauncis Drake, &c. Touching the sinne of Leachery, I can litle say, other then by heare say. And that is, it was neuer more comon in the country, nor of more creditt in the courte: no, not before the enlarging of  Kenelmworthe Castell,  nor in the erecting of  Haumbey  house nor during the tyme of the setting vpp of all the   edifices, situate vpo¯ the lyke foundation: as it hathe bin since the very finishing, of  Rauleghs Arcke. Thus you may see, how Faith is fayled, Robbery allowed, and Leachery moste delighted in. The confusion to follow, is now nexte to be expected: but by whome, when, and in what manner, resteth in the deuyne disposition, of almighty God, whose Iustice, no earthly power (muche lesse any Englishe policie) can possibly resist. Tyme woorketh alteration in all things, and in this world there is nothing, that is not subiect to change: all estates encrease, diminish, are tossed, turned, fall, and are destroyed. Which consisteth not, as  Plato  the heathen Philosopher saith, in the circuyte and limmits of a certaine Period: but in the pleasure, of the Celestiall Soueraigne. Those hauing their beeing moste assured, and durable, that are founded on religion, and iustice. All plants saith our sauiour, that my heauenly father hathe not planted, shalbe plucked vp by the rootes. All temporall gouernments throughoute the world, notwithstanding all worldly wit, power, and practises, whatsoeuer: haue and do daily, so alter and change, that fewe or none can be founde, to haue continued any long course of tyme, in one order and rule. Only the Catholique Churche of Christe, depending vpon the direction of the holy Ghoste, hathe still remayned in one same faithe and visible Monarchie, almoste sixteene hundreth yeares. During which tyme, diuers kyngdomes haue bin diuersly transposed vpsyde downe: and those only found to be least subiect to mutation, that moste haue bin directed by the gouuernours of that Churche. The aforesaid philosopher saith further, that Republiques are neuer happy, but when princes are louers of wisdome, or louers of wisdome do rule: S p. 6.  but  Salomon  speaking by a mouthe more deuyne, exhorteth princes to searche (true) wisdome, to the end, they may raigne Iustly in earthe, and eternally in heauen. Would to God, the resolution of your rulers, had bin laid vppon these groundes, then had the most woorthy for wisdome and vertue, bin preferred, and none for vice, and vilany, aduaunced to chiefest aucthoritie. Then had not his late  excelsi  obtained the greatest rule of all, His excelent e alias Le er.  because of all others, he kepte the greatest ill rule himself: then had they neuer vpholden there vnstable estate, by the only annoyance of their neighbours, nor by their great iniustice, drawne so many daungers, together at the last. Then had the begining bin Godly, the continuance quiet, and the end happy. The Realme of England, hathe in other tymes, bin as often subiect to chaunge, as other countries in the world: but more comonly carying therewith, the blood of the best nobility: what great effusion of blood, ensued the coronarion of Kynge  Henry  the fourthe, at what tyme, the diuision of the two houses of  Yorcke, Phil. de Co es.  and  Lancaster,  began: which lasted the lyues and reignes, of three Kynges following, and was not wholy extyncte, vntill the tyme of Kynge  Henry  the seauenth. During which tyme, there died in diuers battailes, skirmishes, and executions, foure score, of the blood Royall: and the very flowre of the Nobility of England, with infynite other valiant personages, besydes sundry Lords and gentlemen, consumed   in prisons at home, or enforced abroade in banishment, miserably to end the rest of their dayes. In this great confusion, each party as they preuailed, condemned the other for traitors: that in the end, all the whole nobilitie and people, were on the one and the other syde, so taken and vsed. Since which tyme, euen of late, in our owne age and memory, we haue seene sundry chaunges: amonge all which, our Lord delt moste mercifully, when moste daunger was feared: at what tyme, Iohn Dudley Duke of  Northumberlaend,  hauing maryed the Lady Iane to one of his sonnes, and proclaymed them Kynge and Queene, thereby to exclude and cut of the righte of Queene  Mary,  and pretence of Elizabeth, it pleased the deuyne prouyde¯ce so to dispose, that with-out battaile or bloudshed of the people, the punishment only extended, to the principall parties, and some fewe accessaries themselues, Thus may sundry examples of your owne changes shewe you, that alterations are no newe thinges: but that they are bothe comon and generall. Neither can any be so sencelesse (althoughe suche great iniquity had neuer bin committed) as to think your estate were euer stable, or that no new gouernment, did not euer bringe at the least, the change of many mens particuler estates. But the case beeing now such as it is, that his Catholique Maiesty, is not only highly iniuried, and continually vrged: but the whole repose and quyet of Christendome so disturbed, that either his Maiesty or some other prince, must of force seeke the reformation of your country: not for any particuler comoditie, but for a generall good. Whereunto in truthe, his Maiesty is especially more   obligated, then any other: insomuch, that yf there were no cause at all of religion to moue him, yet in regard of the comon iniuryes, dayly donne vnto him, he is euen bounde in righte, reason, and iustice, to do it: & that yf neither he, nor any other should attempte thesame, you are notwithstanding assured of ciuill dissention, no heire to the Crowne apparently knowne, and so many competitiours, to make claime at once, and the wrathe & indignation of God, for so great impietie, by one meanes or other to be satisfied: I cannot see whether the plague of ciuill war, will be easier, then the inconuenience of foreyne inuasion: neither can I see, how you can auoyde the leaste of them bothe. Neither do you desire with Dauid, rather to fall into the handes of God, then into the handes of men, but persist in the augmentation, of your wounted wickednes. It may somtymes please God of his great mercy, to spare a whole citie, for a fewe iust persons therein. And the only hope that remayneth, for the easy reclayminge of your country, is the blood of so many marti s, there powred oute: which being so pretious in his sighte, may be the meane so to mittigate his highe indignation, that the innocent shall not be confounded with the impious, but rather, that many multitudes by there meanes may be saued. It may also stand with his great goodnesse, to make his Catholique Maiesty the meane, for the recouery thereof, not to conquer, or make mutation, of auncient lawes and liberties, which he neuer intended: but only to reduce it, to the old concorde and communion of christendome. This   doubtlesse would be the happiest, & easiest meanes of all other: the heroycall endeuours of his Maiesty considered: whose proceedings in all mercy, myldnes and grace, lie open to the vewe, of heauen and earthe, neither needeth the tounge or pen of any man, declare them: excepte only, to manifest the malice of his aduersaries, vnto those whome they so impudently abuse. His Maiesty also much relying (amonge others of greatest wisdome and vertue of your owne nation) vpon the graue counsell and aduise, of the  Cardinall  of England, whose exceeding care and naturall affection, to his deare country, is awnswerable to his great vertue, wisdome, & learning. You are not heere to regard, the raylings of those, that accompte his grace and all the other exyled Englyshe, traytors, & enemies, to their countrie: falsly saying, that they haue sold it, to the Pope and Kynge of Spaine: as thoughe it were possible, that so great impiety, could remaine amonge so many, so vertuous, so wise, so learned, so honorable, and so vnited in consanguinitie, throughoute the whole countrie: that your Cardinall (as I am well enformed) is of kin and alyance, almost vnto all the Gentlemen, of the countie of  Lancaster.  And the other Gentlemen lincked in lyke sorte, welnighe vnto all the honorable and woorshipfull families, in euery other prouince, being bounde by the very lawes of nature, to the loue of their country and kindred, yf no cause of religion, or reason els did moue them. And as tho ghe your superiours owne, notorious vniuste actions, did not more vehemently vrge reuenge, or hasten reformation, then any persuation els, that possibly mighte be made. Those of your nation that now liue in exile, retayning the true loue, and affection, that Christians oughte to cary to their country, preferring the soule before the body, do first desire the conuersion of there dere countrymen, kindred, & freinds, from a confused chaos of heresies, to the one only Catholique & Apostolique faith. Nexte, the auncient tranquilitie, and quyet accorde thereof, with other Christian countries. And to manifest this their true and sincere affection they are moste redy, and willing, to aduenture the losse of there owne liues. Whereas those that vniustly accuse them, could be content, so that their present aucthoritie mighte continewe, to suffer your soules in all abhominable heresies, to come to vtter damnation, and to leaue you in conclusion, to cut the one the others throte, and so to lye open to the rapyne and spoile, of so-many, as by their meanes you haue offended. These of all others, be the the greatest enemyes to your comon wealth, odious to God, and man, and traitours not only to one prince, and country, but to Christ, and all Christendome, and haue cause to consider this sentence of the sacred scripture,  Regnum a gente in gentem transfertur, propter iniustitias, & iniurias, Eccles. 10.   & contumelias, & diuersos dolos. that is, A Kyngdome is transferred from one people to another, because of iniustice, of iniuries, and contumelies, and diuers deceyts.  These now fynding no further refuge, or assured succour, of Turck, traytor, heretyke, or Barbarian: do labour to put you, in all feare, of extreme daunger and detryment, intended against you: meaning yf the woorst fall, to make your bodies the Bulwarckes, wherewith themselues wilbe defended: so that you should feele the smarte,   howsoeuer they shifte with the shame. Which harme in dede may happen, to the more wilfull & vnaduised, whereas those that be of better consideration, may fynde the meane of there owne safty, and assurance, to rest in themselues, by embracinge those remedies, that it shall please God of his great goodnesse, in such cases to prouyde. Vnto whose deuyne wisdome, & determynation, all must euer be referred, and vnto whose holy protection, I comend your self: Wishing vnto all your countrymen, the due consideration of their case, and the best auoydance of their calamytie,  from Calis  this of Maye, 1589.   Your vnfained freind vvhose harte and hand shall neuer cease to do you seruice.  I. B. AFTER that I had finished this my letter, vnderstanding that throughe defaulte of wynde, together with some difficulty that the messenger put, about his more safe and speedy passage: he was not lyke to departe so soone, as himself had promised, and I expected, I therefore detained this letter, some dayes in my handes vnsealed, attending suche oportunitie, as mighte neerest concurr to our desires. In the meane season, I vnderstood by letters from  Roan,  that the great and extraordinary englishe fleete, furnished at the charges of so many, who either of force, or fauour, had streyned themselues to serue, .  they knew not well whome, where, nor when: yet now, after long delay, great counsell, and correspondence of freinds, they were departed, from the west parte of England, aboute the first of May,  stilo nouo:  vnder the conduct (by sea) of the glorious & famous man Sir,  Frauncis Drake,  who a litle before, had promised the Queene his mistres, to bring the  Kynge  of  Spaine  to very great pouerty, and misery. And the charge of seruice by land, was committed to Sir  Iohn Noris,  whose experience, the englishe were woont greatly to magnify. The rest of their Captaines, and soldiers, were the best that they had: hauing retyred the principall of those, from those partes of the low countries, which they presently possesse. Very shortly after, I vnderstood by other letters, from the afore said place, and the same party. That the English were arryued, not very farr from St.  Iames  in  Galitia.  Perhaps with some intention in their way, to haue visited that place, of especiall deuotion, to the riches and ornaments there. Where   albeit, that very many strangers, from all partes of  Europe:  according to an old custome of christians, do continually come on pilgrimage. And that vnto such, the inhabitants thereaboutes do freely giue leaue, and relief: Yet they now seeing the English to approche, in a manner muche different from other pilgrimes, haue accordingly giuen them a farr other kynde of entertaiment, insomuch (that as my freind writeth) those that lately so arrogantly boasted, of some detriment of ours: which all rhe world knoweth, came not throughe englishe power or puisance, but by the very wyndes, and seas, which it pleased God to permitt to our punishment: Haue now receyued such a check, for that insolencie, that they may see our selues are made the instruments, by our owne armes, to chastice them. Touching the manner and particularities, I cannot at this present fully certify you. Those your self may there, better vnderstand, yf you haue any secrett freind in courte, otherwise you shall hardly come by the certainty, for I feare it wilbe made treason to talke thereof, among the comon sorte of men. Yf you can come by the names of those men of marke: number of soldiers, shipps, and artillery, that you haue lost: I pray you vse some meanes, to send them ouer, because I wold gladly see, how our aduises shall differ. The author of the late pamphlet, printed at  London  in English, & frenche, and entituled.  The copie of a letter sent from England to don Bernardine de Mendoza, Ambassador in Fraunce for the Kyng of Spaine,  no doubte, yf he will take the paines, can very well pen it to the print, because I knowe, he will cary a great care, aboute   the putting downe of euery particuler. And wheras in the beginning of that letter, the author seemeth to be very sad and sorowfull: A counterfait Catholique.  after so late, and long expected comforte, to haue an occasion to signify the lamentable losse, and vtter dissolution, of all hope. Now I can assure him, he may make a peece of amends, in sending ouer at this tyme such good newes, as can somwhat counteruaile the former ill: And yf it shall please him to make an estimate, of the one & the others losses, to see who hathe sustayned the greater: he must also sett downe some reasons, to shewe which of bothe is best able to beare it, & the moste lyke, soonest to recouer it: for by thease considerations, a man shall surest come to the certainety. Thus good Sir, vnderstanding of this bearers present occasion to departe, who now attendeth the closing vp of my letter, I am enforced heere to conclude. Once more committing you to God, & wishing you most hartely well to fare. Iune 1589.