In laudem Angliae charissimae suae Patriae decasticon. ANglia cincta mari' est, Anglis mare commoda mille, Vt{que} alter globus est Anglia cincta mari: Anglia cincta mari' est, sacris quià virgo gubernat Regibus, hinc foelix Anglia cincta mari: Anglia cincta mari' est, homines quià moenia tanquam, Quos amor vnit, abhinc Anglia cincta mari: Anglia cincta mari' est, quòd fert Satrapásque, Ducósque Inuictos Marti', hinc Anglia cincta mari: Anglia psalle Deo, quòd Terra, fretum{que} beârunt Te ante' alias gentes, Anglia psalle Deo. Cato. Pugna pro patria. To his friends, the Gentlemen Readers of England, health. GEntlemen, whereas the old world admired  Hanibal  for but scaling the  Alpes, Caesar  for building a bridg ouer  Rheyne, Pompey  for subduing a few barbarous Territories, leaue now to maruaile at the strategems, the world affordes you greater maruailes. Looke on the experienced prowesse of your owne Countreymen, farre exceeding the puissance of base  Pagans,  who as they bee presidents most honorable: so are they by your steps, and plaudities to be honoured. Imitate the vertues of your Ancestours, that all the world may ring of your noble acts, of your Ancestours said I, nay of our Caualiers yet liuing, who as they be equall in valour to the best of any time; so are they before al other to be followed of your persons at this time. Remember the fortitude   of  Norris  neuer quailed, consider the magnanimitie of  Williams  neuer daunted, and worthie  Yorkes  forwardnes neuer impeached: But what should I compile a catalogue of them, whose valours and vertues are best knowne vnto you: onely this our Soueraigne, and the whole commonwealth intreates you, that as whilom your politique Predecessours, & now these your martiall Progenitours by their exploytes haue attayned the heigth of renowne in the world; so yee like renowned Children of so renowned Parents, would by your couragious enterprises brandish your names and fames throughout the world:  facite, & valete. Yours to commande in all curtesie. G. B.  M.of Arte. A Poem touching the credit of this Newes, with an item to them, that takes felicitie in publishing Lies. NOthing (saith  Quintilian ) so much comme¯deth the person of the writer, as the truth of the subiect, he proposeth to write: And certes nothing aduaunced so highly  Iulius Caesars  historie, as truth polished with Eloquence discreetely: for as in the iudgement of the wise the one without the other had argued great imperfection: so both intermingled sauour of wonderfull discretion, and so much the rather, because the Author seemeth estranged from Philautie, & Ambition. I cannot but praise them of ancient time, & touch some in these dayes, who either for that they know not, or care not for truth, or wil not inquire after the truth, wil be sure to publish nothing but vntruth, mispending their time, misdemeaning their braine, and misusing their pen, no lesse foes to themselues, then back friends to the welminded. I speake this (Gentlemen) for that this Pamphlet had many dayes sithence come to your view, had not these apish Pamphleters neither left waie for themselues, nor other, any further to thrust out their heads: But whereas this obortiue Pygmey dare peepe out, and shew his face to the world, vnderstand that it is but vnder sureties, on condition, that he neither mutter,   speake, nor write any thing but truth, or at the least that whereof he can alleadge sufficient authoritie: who although hee hath been staied, but not brought to a blancke, therein taketh so much the more heartie grace, because he knoweth some of these counterfeites will bee driuen to a Nonplus: And thus much I will saye, and and in saying truly auouch (being priuie to all his proceedings) that at this time he will not, (nay if he would he may not) neither would hee if hee might speake any more than truth, or that hath been credibly informed, or that commonly among the best passeth for truth, wherein if peraduenture hee speake not so much, as some of you knowe; or write so much, as others heare, thinke, that neither his eares, nor his eyes are so large, as to heare and see all things done in his owne countrey, much lesse ouer Sea in a forrayne climate: but accept his Newes fauourably, as he giues it friendly, and if in any iot hee shall offend you, hee most humbly craues your pardon, euer remayning courteously at your commande. G. B.  Magna' est veritas, ét preualet. A Stratagem most venterously attempted, and valiantly atchieued by the French King, the 27. day of Iuly Anno Domini, 1591. THe French King (who for his singular wisedome deserueth to be reckoned a secon  Solomon,  and inuincible fortitude an other  Sampson ) hauing drawen his forces downe into Picardie, presented his armes before the town of  Noyan,  & begirt the same, where hauing continued the siege some few dayes, no daye frée from some hard skirmish, hot incounter, or daungerous assault, the losse for the most part falling on the enemies, whereby the said towne was in ieopardie to haue reuolted (which was practised by some) to the King his part, in so much they stoode on tearmes of yeelding, but that they had some small hope of succour, and supply of victualles to be sent them from  Roan  for the conuoying whereof (as they vnderstoode) should bée sent  Mounsier Tauanas  late commaunder of  Roan,  whose forses consisted of 400. Horse, and 5000. footemen euery way well fitted for such a seruice, carrying mindes resolutely determined (as appeared by the insuing conflict) by some sudden surprise to haue raised   the siege, yea and indaungered the Kinges owne person, if God (who hath promised to defend his seruant  Iosua,  that is his faithfull magistrates, & bring the counsailes of the wicked to naught) had not by straunge meanes miraculously discouered their malicious treacherie, making his verie enimies his willing friendes at such an exigent. For  Monsier Iean de Primadian,  Registerer to the Bishoppe of  Roan  priuie to their intentions, although (as they tearme him) a Catholique, yet mooued in conscience to crosse by what meanes possible hée could any wicked action, or attempt that might touch the safetie of the King his soueraigne person, manifested by letters the day before, the whole plot of treason intended toward his Maiestie. Whereupon the King no lesse desirous to take the opportunitie, then carefull to preuent the euil, immediatly that night commaunded a Cornet of horse, conducted by a braue French Captaine to discouer the Enimie, who by the breake of day approched the walles of  Roan,  where estsoones they had spied issuing forth, the foresaid companies in martch toward  Noyan,  whereupon they presently retired, till by some meanes, and in some conuenie¯t place for the purpose happily they might charge them, or at the least discry their determinations: therof to certify his Maiesty, which (as God would) they performed luckely: for hauing ambushe themselues in the skirt of a wood, on the sudden charged the enimies vauncurriers, ledde by a hardie gentleman (as it seemed.) For notwithstanding our sudden charging them (which was done to the proofe,) whereby they were well nigh discomfited, and that the said leader hardly escaped himselfe, with some few in his companie by his retreate, yet loth to receiue so great a wound to his reputation, as to be mated, or rather vanquished by so small a troupe, as was ours, seconded   ye rest of his followers, yet fighting: but though he performed resolutely his part therein, yet was it his fortune to be taken hardly with life, by one Mayster  Thomas Robartes  an English gentleman, the rest were all chased and taken prisoners, euen at the front of the enimies battalious, with little losse on our side, to the number of some 23. men, hurt, taken, and slaine: But the foresaid Prisoner being with expedition conuaied to the King, confirmed all that before by letters his maiestie had intelligence of, and disclosed also, what wayes, and meanes they had layd downe to surprise his Maiesties forces. The K. supposing it not necessarie to suffer them make their approach in sight of  Noyan,  forthwith consulted to incounter them further of, sending foorth scouces to barre the newes of their comming from the towne, determining himselfe to follow (as he might) with part of his armie (for hée thought it altogether troublesome, and vnméete to dislodge the whole.) And in regarde of the resolute English (for so hée tearmeth them) whom he ment most to imploy in this seruice, of whom also he had good experience, for such like seruices heretofore by them performed, his Maiestie decrees to vse the fewer of his owne Nation, and therefore sending secretly for his approued champion Sir  Roger Williams,  imparted vnto him both what had bin performed, as also his intention: of which the redoubted Cheualier was verie ioyful, & as forward as valiant, greedily thirsted for the incounter, & thought euery minute an hower, til they were marching. All things being put in readines for the iourney, suddenly the espialles returned with newes of the enemies approach, and their order: which Sir  Roger Williams  vnderstanding, euer like himselfe, and hauing now (as he thought) found a danger equall to his heart) which heart through his good fortune hath gotten   a courage to despise al dangers) earnestly desired his Maiestie doo him the honour of the first incounter, in regarde of the safetie of his Maiesties owne person; which the King through intreatie graunted. This request obtayned, and our Vauncurriers in view of the Enemie, worde was brought the King thereof, and being (as God would) in a place situate by nature for the purpose, his Maiestie caused a squadr on of pikes to march forward strongly armed, and in the Reregard of them vndiscouered certaine companies of Musquetters on the left side, in manner of an ambush (yet as a wing to the mayne Squadron) was Sir  Roger Williams,  and with him certaine Cornets of horse, and some companies of Musquetters, to second those of ours, that the Enemie had sight of, and were now readie to incounter: on the right wing was the King with most of the horse in the fielde, as well shot as other, somewhat behinde Sir  Roger  lying also in ambuscado, to answere the hope of the other, if néede required: But in such sort  as when occasion was offered, ye sayd Horsmen with those of Sir  Roger Williams,  answered his Maiesties expectation, and suddenly pursuing the opportunitie (while 300. of their horse were charging our mayne Battaile, (which strongly indured the shock) inclosed the Enemie, and happily at the first incounter, being hotly maintained, discomfited them, and very vigorously pursued the victorie, which (by the omnipotent power of GOD especially, and triumphant valour of the English) being gotten, as hauing chased, and slaughtered them almost the space of two leagues, the retreict sounded, the dead were ouerlooked, and prisoners numbred: The dead were many, and captiues some fewe, all for the most part men of name, worth raunsoming, amongst whome   was the Generall himselfe,  Monsieur Tauanas  Leiutenant of  Roan,  sore hurt, and likewise his Nephew Commaunder of the Fort of S.  Katharins  taken prisoner: which glorie was renownedly atchieued on all parts the 27. day of Iuly,  Anno Domini  1591. The Lord the giuer of victorie bee praysed therefore. This one thing remayneth yet in this report vntouched, which I cannot any way omit, and all true hearted Englishmen may bée ioyfull to record. For the French King both in this pettie battaile, and at all times els, perceiuing the hearts of the English readie prest to doo him seruice, and their haughtie mindes prompt to attempt any graund enterprise, (whereby either glorie, or gaine may he purchased) as also the swift forwardnes, and forward swiftnes of his Eagle Sir  Roger Williams,  to soare ouer and detallant the Martiall foes of so Martiall a field, his Maiestie well noting it, and in noting it scanning what was best to bee done, called them before him, where yéelding first his royall Sister, and them all immortall and most heartie thankes for their paynefull, and no lesse powerfull seruice, vttered many gracious words to the euerlasting commendation of all England. Thus farre concerning this heroicall Stratagem, and wonderfull, and no lesse worthie exployte, effected by the flower of Chiualrie, and mirrour of Curtesie the French King now raigning. Newes is also brought to the French Ledger of the taking of 16. Ships of the Leaguers without any perill, all well laden with commodious Marchandize, and prouision for warre, right against and nigh the Hauen of  Deepe  the 28. day of Iuly last past, which were fraught for  Roan,  (some say for    Newhauen ) but by diuine prouidence brought thether. The mightie GOD of Israel neuer send vs worse newes. Newes also from the Dukedome of  Sauoy,  how  Monsieur de Eguidiers  Gouernour of his Maiesties Forces in those parts, incountred the troupes of horse, that were sent into  France  by the Pope towards the strengthning of the Leaguers, and ouerthrewe foure hundred of them a little belowe the Alpes; the rest miserably escaping by flight, the 28. day of Iuly also: Some say the remnaut is returned into  Italie:  others that they yet houer and liuger in the Countrey. But howsoeuer it be, it is to be hoped they shall haue as infortunate successe, as they haue had hetherto: no other reason I can assigne thereof, but this, that God now in these letter times vouchsafeth to bring things to speedie euen  there by to hasten the comming of his Sonne to iudgement, for that hee hath promised to shorten those dayes; and we knowe by all accompts that they are both likely to bee shortened, and drawe to an ende. For who doubteth but as that butcherly Citie, ( Rome  I meane) and bloudie Nation was first founded in bloud, (the one Brother bathing his hands in the bloud of the other) so shee shall ende in bloud and abominable desolation, as her stiffenecked Sister  Ierusalem  did before her. And to beleeue this I am so much ye rather incited, because I both heare and see daily by the omnipotent power, and outstretched arme of GOD, that both that Citie, that Kingdome, and all the friends and adherents of the same, doo come to perpetuall ruine, and vtter destruction, as is now exemplifled by the noble Rebels, and rebellious Nobles of  France:  for who estéemeth that euer the Duke  de Mayne,  or those noble personages,   that irreligiously resist their God, and proudly rebell against their Soueraigne, could haue béen brought to so extreame miserie, and grieuous calamitie, as to flye from Citie to Citie, from Coast to Coast, from Countrey to Countrey, and finde no safetie, eyther in inward Conscience, or outward conuersation, if they were not euen those, on whom God predestinated to powre his dreadfull and execrable vengeance, permitting them like castaway  Cayne,  no place of safegard, but to become runnagates ouer all the fare of the earth. A second reason also forcible enough I haue to perswade me, that euen now the kingdome of Antichrist is falling, and shortly (the Lorde of hostes knowes how soone) will fall, for that another piller of his chayre, or rather a mayne proppe of his pauili  begins to shrink, his golden Metropolis ( Spaine  I meane) who hauing now many hundred yeares maintained his Religion, fostred his sucklings, panipred his shauelings, defended his Inquisition, and furthered his proceedings, in part  ereth and is wearie of hir burden, a burden in deede no lesse burden some, then combersome both to bodie and soule. For within these fewe dayes, not a moneth sithence, variance hapning betweene the chiefe Masters of the Inquisition, and the Kings Arch-secretarie,  Sarogosa,  a citie of  Aragon  (wherin the saide Secretarie was borne (began to take armes against the Inquisition, and approoue unexpected, and vntrue positions (as they tearmed them) contrarie to their Decretalls, their Doctours, their Diuines, and diuells. A Kingdome (saith our Sauiour) deuided in itselfe, cannot stand: certes then the kingdome of Sathan deuided, must needes be ruinated: for as by concord small things come to perfection: so by discorde the   greatest powers, puissantes, and principalities, that euer haue béen in the Worlde, bend to destruction. Weigh the state of the 4. Monarchies both flourishing and declining, the cause of their establishment, and originall of their decaye, and yee shall finde concord a meane to the one, and discord a mother of the other: bath bringing foorth strange effects. But to come nigher, what was the first cause of planting the Gospell (for which so many haue, and yet spend their dearest bloud in  France ) but their first supplanting of common quiet, their vnspeakeable butcheries, horrible martyrdonies, and execrable massakers, all doubtles begon, and practised by the sufferance of God to none other end, but to raise vp fresh feedes, and nourish the increase of the Gospell, calling home thousands of soules elected to his kingdome. This did  France,  and wee are daily to hope, and howerly to pray for the like of  Spayne:  The Lord open their eyes to discerne white from black, light from darkenes, truth from errour in due time according to his good will and pleasure. But leauing  Spayne,  let vs returne agayne to  France,  from wherlie euery day (the Lord for his merries sake increase it) are heard blissefull and most happie notes, his Maiesties affayres successiuely prospering an all sides. For sithence the departine of our Souldiers from  London,  which was on the 23. 24. 25. and 26. dayes of Iuly last, vnto this 12. of August, besides the Newes already set downe, many matters of great importance haue chaunced, the veritie whereof (for that I cannot attayne, and learne the circumstances directly) I passe them ouer in silence, onely of this passell insuing, I haue receiued credible information, that on the sixt day of this moneth, being the 16. after their computation at    Bloys,  his Maiesties Forces all met, and royally counited themselues together, at what time the braue worthies and warlike Gallants of  Germany  appearing on horsebacke in Martiall order, euery one throughly furnished with all habiliments necessarie, were first welcomed by his Maiestie, and entertayned of the Campe with a peale of ordinance ioyfully. But whereas in the letter (from whence I coppied out this Newes) all his Forces be named, and yet no mention made of the  English,  I suppose hée meant it by the forces of the  Almaygnes  onely, and those his own subiects that were sent out of  Brytain  to ioyne with his Maiesties hoast there, and none otherwise. For there is newes come lately, that the Earle with his companies remaine yet about  Deipe,  there staying a while on weightie considerations, till they heare further. But how euer it bee, this is most certaine, that his Maiestie hath a goodlie armie, besides those warlike troupes the right Honorable Earle of  Essex  is to come with, who how they were appointed, is knowne to al  England,  and I neede not now discourse. Thus farre concerning the prosperous successe, and fortunate progresse of this mighty Prince, whom the Lorde hath preserued from time to time, from yeare to yeare, day to day, hower to hower, so many times, yeares, dayes, and howers most miraculoufly from all the furious inuasions, and cancared conspiracies of all his enemies, and made him to triumphe ouer them, outliuing the most part, reclayming by his vertues the better sort, and taming by policie the peruerse and obstinate, being snatched from the chawes of the Lyons, deliuered from the gates of Death, and reserued from infinite perills (as the wide world confesseth) by diuine prouidence, to none   other end, but to declare the wonderous workes of the Lorde, and shew forth his mightie acts vnto the Princes of the earth, and especially that Man of sin, and strumpet of  Babylon,  foster-father of brauls and battayles among Christian Princes, and generally the Bloudsucker, Butcher, and tormentour of all Europe, whome God in due time at his good pleasure will by the hand of this his annoynted (as hee did by  Dauid  fighting against the vncircumcised,  Philistin, ) terrifie, torment, scourge, and confound, which he hath begon by his  English Debora  first, and wil finish in this his Champion, (making them both mirrours for all Potentates) that all the world, and especially the kingdome of Antichrist may acknowledge, that there is a God that ruleth in  Israel,  and protecteth the house of  Iaacob,  making his enemies his footestooles. The Lord in mercy graunt it, to the comfort of his little flock, the abolishment of sinne, confusion of his enemies, and establishment of his owne glorie in  Sion,  and let all faithfull Soldiers, and loyall subiects say, Amen, and crie in feruent zeale of spirit, Lord Iesus come quickely, euen so. Amen.