The Epicure The interlocutours. HEDONIVS SPVDEVS. WHAT  meaneth mi  Spudeus,  too applye hys booke so ernestlye, I praye you what is the matter you murmour so with your selfe? SPVDEVS. The truth is (O  Hedoni)  I seke too haue knowledge of a thing, but as yet I cannot fynde yt whych maketh for my purpose. HEDO What booke haue you there in your bosome? SPVDE. Ciceros  dialoge of the endes of goodnes. HEDO. It had bene farre more better for you, too haue sought for the begynnynges of godly thynges, then the endes. SPVDE. Yea, but  Marcus Tullius  nameth ye the ende of godlines which is an exquisite, a far passing, and a very absolute goodnes in euerye puincte, wherein there is contained all kynde of vertu: vnto the knowledge ther of whosoeuer can attaine, shuld desire none other thing, but hold himselfe hauyng onely that, as one most fully content and satisfied. HED. That is a worke of very great learning and eloquence. But doo you thynke, yt you haue preuailed in any thing there, whereby you haue the rather   come too the knowledge of the truth? SPE. I have had such fruite and co¯moditie by it, that now verelye hereafter I shall doubt more of the effect and endes of good thinges, then I did before. HEDO. It is for husband menne too stande in doubt how farre the limittes and merebankes extend. SPE. And I cannot but muse styll, yea, and wonder very muche, why ther hath been so great controuersie in iudgementes vpon so weightie a matter (as this is) emongist so well learned menne: especially suche as bee most famous and auncient writers. HEDO. This was euen the cause, where the verite of a thyng is playne and manifest, contrarily, ye errour through   ignoraunce againe in the same, is soone great & by diuers meanes encreaseth, for yt thei knewe not the foundation and first beginnyng of the whole matter, they doo iudge at all auentures and are very fondly disceaued, but whose sentence thynke you too bee truest? SPE. Whan I heare  MARCVS Tullius  reproue the thyng, I then fa¯tasie none of all their iudgementes, and whan I heare hym agayne defende the cause: it maketh me more doubtfull the¯ euer I was and am in suche a studie, that I can say nothyng. But as I suppose ye Stoickes haue erred the lest, and nexte vnto the¯ I commend the  Peripatetickes. HEDO. Yet I lyke none of their opinions   so well as I doo the Epicures. SPV. And emo¯gist all the sectes: the  Epicures  iudgement is most reproued and condemned with the whole consent and arbitreine¯t of all menne. HED. Let vs laye a side all disdayne and spite of names, and admitte the Epicure too bee suche one, as euery man maketh of hym. Let vs ponder and weighe the thyng as it is in very deed. He setteth the high and principall felicitie of man in pleasure, and thiketh that lyfe most pure and godly, whiche may haue greate delectation and pleasure, and lytle pensiuenes. SPV. It is euen so. HED. What more vertuouser thyng, I praye you, is possible too bee spoken then this saiyng. Spu. Yea, but all menne wonder and crye out on it, and saye: it is the voyce of a bruite beast, and not of manne. Hedo. I knowe thei doo so, but the  erre in ye vocables of theise thinges, and are very ignoraunt of the true and natiue significations of the woordes, for if wee speake of perfecte thynges, no kinde of menne bee more righter  Epicures,  then Christen men liuing reuere¯tly towardes God and ma¯, and in the right seruice and worshiping of Christ. SPV But I thinke the  Epicures  bee more nerer and agree rather with the  Cynickes,  then with the Christien sorte: forsoth ye Christiens make them selues leane   with fastynge, bewayle and lament their offences, and eyther they bee nowe poore, or elles theyr charitie and liberalitie on the nedye maketh theim poore, thei suffer paciently too bee oppressed of menne that haue great power and take many wronges at their handes, and many men also laughe theim too skorne. Nowe, if pleasure brynge felicitie wyth it, or helpe in anye wyse vnto the furderaunce of vertue: we see playnly that this kynde of lyfe is fardest from al pleasures. Hedonius. But doo you not admitte  Plautus  too bee of authoritie? Speudeus. Yea, yf he speake vprightely. Hedonius. Heare nowe them, and beare awaye wyth you the saiynge of   an vnthriftie seruaunt, whyche is more wyttier then all the paradoxes of the Stoickes. SPE. I tarie to heare what ye wil say HEDO. Ther is nothyng more miserable then a mynd vnquiet & agreued with it selfe. SPE. I like this saiyng well, but what doo you gather of it? HEDO. If nothing bee more miserable the¯ an vnquiet mynde, it foloweth also, that there is nothing happiar, then a mynde voyde of all feare, grudge, and vnquietnes SPEV. Surely you gather the thing together with good reason but that notwithstandyng, in what countrie shall you fynde any such mynde, that knoweth not it selfe gyltie and culpable in some kynde of euell  HEDO.  I call that euyll, whiche dissolueth the pure loue and amitie betwixt God and manne. SPV. And I suppose there bee verye fewe, but that thei bee offenders in this thynge. HEDO. And in good soth I take it, that al those yt bee purdged, are clere: whych wiped out their fautes with lee of teares, and saltpeter of sorowfull repentaunce, or els with the fire of charitie, their offe¯ces nowe bee not only smalle grefe and vnquietnes too them, but also chaunce often for some more godlier purpose, as causing the¯ too lyue afterward more accordyngly vnto Gods commau¯dementes. SPV. In deede I knowe saltpeter and lee, but yet I neuer hearde before, that faultes   haue been purdged with fire. H. Surely, if you go to the minte you shall see gould fyned wyth fyre, notwithsta¯dyng that ther is also, a certaine kynde of linen that brenneth not if it bee cast in ye fyre, but loketh more whiter then any water coulde haue made it, & therefore it is called  Linum asbestinum,  a kynde of lynen, whyche canne neither bee quenched with water nor brent with fyre. Spu. Nowe in good faith you bring a paradox more wonderful then all the maruailous and profound thynges of the Stoickes: lyue thei pleasasauntly whom Chryst calleth blessed for that they mourne & lament? Hedonius. Thei seme too the worlde too mourne, but   verely they lyue in greate pleasure, and as the commune saiynge is, thei lyue all together in pleasure, in somuche that  SARDANAPALVS, Philoxenus,  or  Apitius  compared vnto them: or anye other spoken of, for the greate desyre and study of pleasures, did leade but a sorowefull and a myserable lyfe. Spe. These thinges that youdeclare bee so straunge and newe, that I can scarcelye yeoue any credite vnto them. Hedo. Proue and assaye them ones, and you shall fynde all my saiynges so true as the Gospell, and immediatly I shal bryng the thynge too suche a conclusion (as I suppose) that it shall appeare too differ very lytle from the truth SPV. make hast then vnto your purpose. HED. It shalbe doone if you wyll graunt me certayne thynges or I begynne. Spu. If in case you demaunde suche as bee resonable. Hedo. I wyl take myne aduauntage, if you confesse the thyng that maketh for mine intent. Spu. go too. Hedo. I thynke ye wyll fyrste graunt me, that ther is great diuersitie betwxt the solle and the bodye Spu. Euen as much as there is betwene heauen and yearth, or a thyng earthly and brute, & yt whiche dieth neuer, but alwayes co¯taineth in it the godly nature. Hedo. And also, that false deceiueable & counterfeited holy thynges, are not too bee taken for those, which in very dede be   godly. Spude. No more then the shaddowes are too bee estemed for the bodies, or the illusions and wonders of wytchcraftes or the fantasies of dreames, are too bee taken as true thynges. HE. Hitherto you answer aptly too my purpose, and I thynke you wyl graunt me this thyng also, that true and godly pleasure can reste and take place no where but only on such a mynd that is sobree and honest. SPV. What elles? for no man reioyseth too beholde the Sunne, if his eyes bee bleared or elles delecteth in wyne, if the agew haue infected hys tast. HED. And the  Epicure  hymselfe, or elles I am disceiued, would not clippe & enbrace that pleasure, whiche   would bring with it farre greater payne and suche as would bee of long continuaunce. SPV I thynke he woulde not, if he had any wytte at all. HED. Nor you wyll not denye this, that God is the chiefe and especiall goodnes, then whom there is nothyng fayrer, there is nothyng ameabler, ther is nothing more delicious and swetter. SPVDE. No man wyll deny thys except he bee very harde hearted and of an vngentlernature then the  Ciclopes. HED. Nowe you haue graunted vnto me, that none lyue in more pleasure, then thei whyche lyue vertuouslye, and agayne, none in more sorowe and calamytie then those that   lyue vngratiously. Spu. Then I haue grau¯ted more the¯ I thought I had. He. But what thing you haue ones confessed too bee true (as  Plato  sayth) you should not deny it afterward. SPV. Go furth with your matter. HEDO The litle whelpe yt is set store and greate price by, is fed most daintely, lieth soft, plaieth and maketh pastime continually, doo you thinke that it lyueth plesau¯tly? SPV. It dooeth truely. HEDO. Woulde you wyshe to haue suche a lyfe? SPV. God forbyd that, excepte I woulde rather bee a dogge then a man, HEDO. Then you confesse that all the chief pleasures arise and spring from the mynd, as though it were from a welspryng. SPV.  That is euident ynough. HE. Forsoth the strength and efficacy of the minde is so great, that often it taketh away the felyng of al externe and outward pain & maketh that pleasaunt, which by it selfe is very peynful. SPV. We se that dayly in louers, hauyng great delight to sytte vp long & too daunce attendaunce at their louers doores all the colde wynter nyghtes. HEDO. Now weigh this also, if the naturall loue of man, haue suche great vehemency in it, which is a commune thyng vnto vs, both with bulles and dogges, howe much more should all heauenly loue excell in vs, which co¯meth of ye spirit of Christ, whose stre¯gthe is of suche power, that it   would make death a thing most terrible, too bee but a pleasure vnto vs. Spu. What other men thinke inwardly I knownot, but certes thei want many pleasures which cleaue fast vnto true and perfect vertue. He. What pleasures? Spu. Thei waxe not rich, thei optein no promotion, thei ban ket not, thei dau¯ce not, thei sing not, thei smell not of swete oynt mentes, thei laugh not, thei play not. He. We should haue made no mention in thys place of ryches and prefermente, for they bryng wyth them no pleasaunt lyfe, but rather a sadde and a pe¯siue. Let vs intreate of other thynges, suche as they chiefely seeke for, whose desyre is to liue deliciously, see ye not daily dro¯kerdes,   fooles, and mad menne grinne and leape? SPV. I see it HED. Do you thynke that thei liue most pleasau¯tly? SPV God send myne enemies such myrth & pleasure. HE. Why so? Sp. For ther lacketh emongist the¯ sobrietie of mind. HE. Then you had leuer sit fastyng at your booke, then too make pastime after any suche sorte. SP. Of the¯ both: truly I had rather chose to delue. H. For this is plaine that be twixt the mad ma¯ & the dru¯kerd ther is no diuersitie, but yt slepe wil helpe the one his madnes, & with much a doo ye cure of  Physicions  helpeth the other, but the foole natural differeth nothing from a brute beast except by shape and portrature of body, yet thei   be lesse miserable whom nature hathe made verye brutes, then those that walowe theim selues in foule and beastly lustes. SP. I confesse that. Hedo. But now tell me, whether you thynke the¯ sobre and wyse, which for playn vanities and shadowes of plesure, booth dispice the true and godlye pleasures of the mynde and chose for them selues suche thynges as bee but vexacion & sorowe. SPV. I take it, thei bee not. Hedo. In deedethei bee not dru¯ke with wyne, but with loue with anger, with auarice, with ambicion, and other foule and filthie desires, whiche kynde of drunkenes is farre worse, the¯ that is gotten with drinking of wine. Yet  Sirus  yt leude co¯spanio¯   of whom mention is made in ye commedie, spake witty thynges after he had slepte hym self soobre, and called too memorie his greate and moost beastlye drunkenes: but the minde that is infected with vicious & noughty desire, hath muche a doo too call it selfe whom agein? How many yeares doeth loue, anger, spite, sensualitie, excesse, and ambition, trouble and prouoke the mynde? How many doo wee see, whiche euen from their youth, too their latter dais neuer awake nor repent them of the drunkennes, of ambition, nigardnes, wanton lust, & riatte? Spu. I haue knowen ouermany of yt sorte. Hedo. You haue grau¯ted that false and fayned good   thinges, are not too bee estemed for the pure and godly. Sp. And I affirme that still. Hedo. Nor that there is no true and perfect pleasure, except it bee taken of honest and godly thynges. Spud. I confesse that. He. Then (I pray you) bee not those good that the commune sorte seeke for, they care not howe? Spu. I thinke they be not. Hedo. Surely if thei were good, they would not chaunce but onely too good men: and would make all those vertuous that they happen vntoo. What maner of pleasure make you that, doo you thinke it too bee godly, which is not of true & honest thynges, but of de ceatfull: and coometh out of ye shadowes of good thynges? Sp.  Nay in noo wyse. He. For pleasure maketh vs to liue merely. Spu. Yea, nothyng so muche. He. Therfore no man truely liueth pleasauntly, but he that lyueth godly: that is, whiche vseth and delecteth onli in good thynges: for vertue of it selfe, maketh a man to habound in all thynges that bee good, perfete, & prayse worthy: yea, it onely prouoketh God the fountaine of all goodnes, too loue and fauour man. SP. I almost consent with you. HED. But now marke howe far they bee from all pleasure, whiche seeme openly emongist all men too folowe nothyng, but an inordinate delectation in in thynges carnall.   First their mynde is vile, and corrupted with the sauour and taste of noughtie desires, in so muche yt if any pleasaunt thing chaunce them, forthwith it waxeth bitter, and is nought set by, in like maner as where ye welle hed is corrupted and stynketh, there ye water must nedes be vn sauery. Agein ther is no honest pleasure, but that whiche wee receaue with a sobre and a quiet mynde. For wee see, nothyng reioyseth the angry man more, the¯ too bec reuenged on his offenders, but that pleasure is turned into pain after his rage bee past, and anger subdued. Spu. I say not the contrary. He. Finally, suche leude pleasures bee taken of fallible thinges, therefore   it foloweth that they be but delusions and shadowes. What woulde you say furthermore, if you saw a ma¯ so deceaued with sorcerie & also other detestable witchecraftes, eat, drynke, leap, laugh, yea, and clappe handes for ioye, when ther wer no such thyng there in very dede, as he beleueth he seeth. Spu. I wolde say he were both mad and miserable. Hedo. I my self haue been often in place, where the lyke thyng hath been doone. There was a priest whiche knewe perfectly by longe experience and practise, the arte to make thynges seme that they were not, otherwise called,  deceptio visus, Sp. He did not lerne that arte of the holy scripture? Hedo. Yea, rather   of most popeholy charmes and witchecraftes: that is too saye, of thinges, cursed, dampnable, and wourthy too bee abhorred. Certayne ladies & gentlewomen of the courte, spake vnto hym oftentimes: saiyng, they woulde coom¯ one day too his house and see what good chere he kept: reprouyng, greatly vile and homly fare, and moderate expenses in all thynges. He graunted they shulde bee welcome, and very instauntly desired them. And they came fastyng because they would haue better appetites. Wham they wer set to dyner (as it was thought) ther wanted noo kynde of delitious meat: they filled the¯ selues habou¯dantly: after ye feast was   doone, they gaue moost hearty thanckes, for their galaunte cheare, and departed, euery one of them vnto their owne lodgynges: but anone their stomackes beganne too waxe an hungred, they maruayled what this shuld meane, so soone to be an hungred and a thirste, after so sumptuous a feast: at the last the matter was openly knowen and laught at. Spu. Not without a cause, it had been muche better for the¯ too haue satisfied their stomackes at their owne chambers with a messe of potage, the¯ too be fed so delitiousli with vain illusions. H. And as I think ye commune sort of men ar muche more too bee laught at, whiche in steede of Godlye thynges,   chose vaine and transitory shadowes, and reioyce excedyngly in suche folishe phansies that turne not afterwarde in too a a laughter, but into euerlasting lamentation and sorow. Spudeus The more nerelier I note your saiynges, the better I like the¯. Hedo. Go too, let vs graunt for a tyme these thynges too bee called pleasaunt, that in very dede ar not. Would you saye that meeth were swete: whiche had more Aloes myngled with it, then honye? Spud. I woulde not so say and if there were but the third part of an ounce of Aloes mixt with it. Hedo. Orels, would you wishe to bee scabbed because you haue some pleasure too scratch? Spud. Noo, if I wer   in my right mynd. HED. Their weigh with your self how great peyne is intermyngled wyth these false and wrongly named pleasures, yt vnshamefast loue filthie desire, much eatyng and drinking bring vs vnto: I doo omitte now that, which is principall grudge of conscience, enemitie betwixt God and ma¯, and expectation of euerlastyng punishe¯ment. What kynd of pleasure, I pray you is ther in these thinges, that dooeth not bryng with it a greate heape of outeward euilles? SPV. What bee thei? HEDO. We ought to let passe and forbeare in this place auarice, ambition, wrath, pryde enuy; whiche of their selues bee heuy and sorowful euylles and   let vs conferre and compare all those thynges together, yt haue the name of some chief and special pleasure: wher as the agew the hedache, the swelling of the belly, dulnes of witte, infamy, hurt of memory, vomyting, decaye of stomacke, tremblyng of the body succede of ouer muche drynking: thynke you, that the  Epicure  would haue estemed any suche lyke pleasure as thys, co¯uenient and wourthy desire? SPV. He woulde saye it wer vtterly too bee refused. HEDONi. Wheras young men also with hauntynge of whores (as it is dayly seene) catche the newe leprosie, nowe otherwyse named Iobs agew, and some cal it the scabbes of Naples, throughe   which desease they feele often ye most extreme and cruell paines of deathe euen in this lyfe, and cary about abodye resemblyng very much some dead coarse or carryn, do you thynke that ther apply them selues vnto godlye pleasure. SPVD. Noo, for after thei haue been often familiar with their pretyones, then they must goo streighte too the barbours, that chaunceth continuallye vnto all whoremongers. HED. Now fayne that ther wer alyke measure of pain and plesure, would ye then require too haue the toothache so longe as the pleasure of quaffing & whor dome endured? SPV. Verely I had rather want them booth, for ther is no commoditie nor vantage   to bye pleasure with payn but only to chau¯g one thing for another, but the heit choise is nowe not too affectionate anye such leudnes, for  MAR. Tullius  calleth that an inward greife & sorow. He. But now ye prouocation & entisement of vnleful plesure, besides that it is much lesse then the pain which it bringeth with it, it is also a thing of a very short time: but if the leprosye bee ones caught, it tourmenteth men al their life daies very pitifully & oftentimes co¯straineth them to wyshe for death before thei ca¯ dye. SP. Such disciples as those then, the  Epicure  would not knowe. HED. For the most part pouertie, a very miserable and painfull burden, foloweth   lechery, of immoderate lust co¯meth the palsie, tremblyng of ye senewes, blcardnes of eyes, and blyndnes, the leprosie and not these only, is it not a {pro}per pece of worke (I pray you) to chau¯g this short pleasure neyther honest nor yet godly, for so manye euylles far more greuouse and of muche longer continuance. SP. Although there shoulde no pain com of it, I esteme hym to bee a very fond occupier, which would chau¯ge precious stones for glasse. HE. You meane that would lose the godly pleasures of the mynde, for the coloured pleasures of ye body. SP. That is my meanyng. HE. But nowe let vs come to a more perfecter supputation, neither the agewe   nor yet pouerty foloweth alwaies carnal pleasure, nor the new leprosy or els the palsy waitnot on at altimes the great & excessiue vse of lecherye, but grudge of co¯sie¯ce euermore is a folower & sure companion of al vnleaful pleasure, then the which as it is plainly agreed betwixt vs, nothyng is more miserable. SPV. Yea,  rather it grudgeth their conscience sometyme before hande, & in the self pleasure it pricketh their mynde, yet ther bee some yt you woulde say, want this motion and feelyng. HE. Thei bee nowe therfore in worse estate & condition. Who would not rather feele payne, then too haue hys body lacke any perfecte sence, truly from some ether intemperatnes   of euel desires, euen like as it were a certayne kynde of drunkenes, or els wont and commune haunt of vice which ar so hardened in them, yt they take a way ye felyng & consideration of euyl in their youth, so that wham agee commeth vpo¯ them beside other infinitie hurtes and perturbations agaynst whose commyng thei should haue layd vp the deedes of their former lyfe, as a special iuwel and treasure: then thei stande greatly in fear of death, a thyng emongist all other most ineuitable, & that no man canne shonne: yea, and the more they haue heretofore been dysmayed and lacked their sences, the greater now is their vn quietnes and grudge of conscience,   then truely the mynde is sodenly awaked whether it wol or noo, and verely wher as olde agee is alwayes sad and heuy of it selfe for as muche as it is in subiection and bondage vnto many incommodities of nature, but then it is farre more wretchede and also fylthye, if the mynde vnquiet with it selfe shal trouble it also: feastes, ryotous banketyng, syngyng, and daunsynge, with manye suche other wanton toyes & pastimes which he was communely yeoue¯ vnto & thought very plesau¯t when he was young, bee nowe paynfull vnto hym beyng olde and crooked, ne agee hath nothyng too comforte and fortifi  it selfe withall, but onely too remembre that it hath passed ouer the course of yeares in vertue and godly liuyng and conceaue a special trust too obtaine herafter a better kynde of life. These be the two staues wherevpon age is stayed, & if in their steed you wyll lay on hym these two burdens: that is, memorie how synfully he hath ledde his life, and desperation of the felicitie that is too coome, I praye you what liuyng thyng can bee feyned too suffre sorer punishement and greater miserie?. spu. Verely I can see nothyng although some man woulde saye an olde horse. hedo. Then to conclude it is too late to waxe wise And that saiyng appereth now   too bee very true. Carefull mornynges doo oftentymes folowe mery euentides, and all vayne and outragious mixth euer turneth into sorowfull sighes: yea, & they shulde haue considered both that there is noo pleasure aboue ye ioyfulnes of the heart, and that chearefull mynde maketh agee too florishe, an heauy spirit consumeth the boones, & also that all the dayes of the poore are euell: that is, sorowfull and wretched. And agayne a quiet mynde is lyke a contynuall feaste. SPVDEVS. Therfore they bee wyse, that thryue in tyme, and gather too gether necessaries for that agee coom¯. HEDONI. The holy scripture intreateth not soo wordely   as too measure the felicitie and highe consolation of manne, by the goodes of fortune, onely he is very poore, that is destitute and voyde of al grace & vertue, and standeth in boundage and debette, bothe of bodye & solle vnto that tyranne oure moost foo & mortall enemie the deuill. SPV. Surely he is one that is veri rigorous and impatient in demaundynge of his dutie. HE. Moreouer that man is ryche, whiche fyndeth mercye and foryeouenes at the handes of god. What shuld he feare, that hath suche a protectour? Whether men? where as playnely theyr hole power may lesse do agae¯st God, then the bytyng of a gnat,   hurteth the Elephant. Whether death? truly that is a right passage for good men vnto all sufficient ioy and perfection accordyng too the iust reward of true religion and vertue. Whether hell? For as in that the holy prophete speaketh boldely vnto God. Although I shulde walke in the middest of the shadow of death, I wil not feare any euils because yu art with me. Wherfore shulde he stande in feare of deuils, whiche beareth in his heart hym, that maketh the deuils too tremble and quake. For in diuers places the holye scripture praiseth and declareth openly the mynde of a vertuous man, too bee the right temple of God. And this to bee so true yt   that it is not too bee spoken agaynst, ne in any wise shuld bee denied. SPV. Forsoth I can not see, by what reason these saiynges of yours can be confuted althoughe they seme too varye muche from the vulgar and commune opinion of men. HEDO. Why doo they soo? SPV. After your reasonyng euery honest poore man, shulde liue a more pleasaunt life, then any other, how much soeuer he did habou¯d in riches, honour, and dignitie: and breuely though he had all kynde of pleasures. HE. Adde this too it (if it please you) too bee a kyng, yea, or an emperour if you take away a quiet mynd with it selfe, I dare boldely say, that the poore man sklenderlye   and homely appareled, made weake with fastyng, watchyng, great toile and labour, and that hath scarcely a groat in all the worlde, so that his mynde bee godly, he lyueth more deliciously then that man whiche hathe fyue hu¯dreth times greater pleasures & delicates, then euer had  Sardanapalus. SP. Why is it the¯, that we see communely those that bee poore looke farre more heuely then riche men. HED. Because some of them bee twise poore, eyther some desease, nedines, watchyng, labour, nakednesse, doo soo weaken the state of their bodyes, that by reason therof, the chearefulnes of their myndes neuer sheweth it selfe, neyther in these thinges,   nor yet in their deathe. The mynde, forsooth thoughe it bee inclosed within this mortal bodye, yet for that it is of a stronger nature, it so¯what tra¯sfourmeth and fascioneth the bodie after it selfe, especially if the ve hement instigation of the spirit approche the violent inclination of nature: this is the cause we see oftentymes suche men as bee vertuous die more cherefully, then those that make pastyme contynually, & bee yeoue¯ vnto al kynd of pleasures. SP. In very dede, I haue meruayled oftten at that thyng. HED Forsoothe it is not a thyng too bee marueyled at, though that there shulde bee vnspeakeable   ioy and comforte where God is is present, whiche is the heed of all mirth and gladnes, nowe this is no straunge thyng, althoughe the mynde of a godly mad doo reioyce contynually in this mortall bodye: where as if the same mynde or spirit discended into the lowest place of hell shuld lose no parte of felicitie, for whersoeuer is a pure mynd, there is god, wher God is: there is paradise, ther is heauen, ther is felicitie, wher felicitie is: ther is the true ioy and synsere gladnes. SP. But yet they shuld liue more pleasauntly, if certein incommodities were taken from them, and had suche pastymes as eyther they dispise orels can not get nor attaine vnto. HE.  (I praye you) doo you meane, suche incommodities as by the commune course of nature folow the condition or state of ma¯: as hunger, thirst, desease, werynes, age, death, lyghtnyng yearthquake, fluddes & battail? SPV. I meane other, and these also. HEDO. Then we intreate styll of mortal thynges and not of immortal, & yet in these euils the state of vertuous men, may bee better borne withal, then of suche as seeke for the pleasures of the body they care not howe. SPV. Why so? HEDO. Especyally because their myndes bee accustomed and hardened with most sure and moderate gouernaunce of reason against al out ragious affections of the mind   and they take more patiently those thynges that cannot bee shonned then the other sort doo Furthermore, for as muche as thei perceiue, all such thynges ar sent of god, either for the punishment of their faultes, or els too excitate and sturre them vp vnto vertue, then thei as meeke and obediente chyldren receiue them from the hand of their mercifull father, not only desireously, but also chearefully and geue thankes also, namely for so merciful punyshment and inestimable gaines. SPV. But many doo occatio¯ griefes vnto the¯ selues. HEDO. But  o seeke remedye at the  Phisicions,  either to preserue their bodies in helth or elles if they bee sycke, too recouer   health, but willyngly too cause their owne sorowes, that is, pouertie, sickenes, persecution, slaunder, excepte the loue of God compel vs therto, it is novertue but folishnes: but as ofoften as thei bee punyshed for Christ and iustice sake, who dar bee so bold as too cal them beggers & wretches? wham the Lord himself very famyliarly calleth them blessed, and commau¯deth vs to reioyse for their state and condition. SPV. Neuerthelesse, these thynges haue a certayne payne and griefe. HEDO. Thei haue, but on the onesyde, what for fear of hel, and the other for hoope of euerlastynge ioye, the payne is sone past and forgotten Now tell me if you knewe that   you myghte neuer bee sycke, or elles that you shoulde feele no payne of your body in your life tyme, if you woulde but ones suffer your vtter skinne too bee prycked with a pynnes puinct, would you not gladly and with all your very heart suffer then so lytle a payne as that is? SPV Verye gladlye, yea, rather if I knewe perfectlye that my teeth would neuer ake, I would willynglye suffer too bee prycked depe with a nedle, and too haue both mine eares bored through with a bodkin. HEDO. Surely what payne soeuer happeneth in this lyfe, it is lesse and shorter, compared with the eternall paines, then is the soden pricke of a needle, incompariso¯ of the   lyfe of man though it bee neuer so long, for there is no conuenience or proportion of the thyng that hath ende, and that whych is infinite. SPV. You speake very truly. HEDO. Now if a man coulde fully perswade you, that you should neuer feele payne in al your life, if you did but ones deuide the flame of ye fyre, with your hande, whyche thyng vndoughtely  Pithagoras  forbade, woulde you not gladlye doo it? SPV. Yea, on that condicion I had liefer doo it an hundred times, if I knew precisely the promiser would kepe touch. HE. It is playne God cannot deceaue. But now that feelyng of paine in the fyre is longer vnto the whole lyfe of man  then is the   lyfe of ma¯, in respect of the heauenlye ioye, althoughe it were thrise so long as ye yeares of  Nestor,  for that casting of the hand in the fyre thoughe it bee neuer so shorte, yet it is some parte of hys lyfe, but the whole lyfe of man is noo portion of tyme in respect of the eternal lyfe, SPV. I haue nothyng too saye against you. HEDO. Doo you then thyncke that anye affliction or tourment can disquiet those that prepare them selues wyth a chearful hearte and a stedfast hoope vnto the kyngedome of God, wher as the course of this lyfe is nowe so shorte? SPVDE. I thinke not, if thei haue a sure perswasion and a constant hope too attayne. it. HEDO. I coome   now vnto those pleasures, whiche you obiected agaynst me, they do wythdrawe them selues from daunsynge, bankettynge, from pleasaunte seeghtes, they dispyce all these thynges, as thus: for to haue the vse of thinges farre more ioyfulle, and haue as great pleasure as these bee, but after another sorte: the eye hath not seene, the eare hath not heard, nor the heart of man cannot thyncke what consolations  GOD  hathe ordeined for them that loue hym. Sayncte Paule knewe what maner of thynges shoulde bee the songes, queeres, daunsynges, and bankettes of vertuous myndes, yea, in this lyfe. SPVDEVS but there bee some leafull pleasures,   whyche they vtterlye refuse. HEDONIVS. That maye bee, for the immoderate vse of leafull and godly games or pastymes, is vnleaful: and if you wyll excepte this one thing onlye, in al other thei excelle whiche seeme too leade a paynfull lyfe, and whom we take too bee ouerwhelmed with all kynd of miseries. Now I prai you what more roialler sight can ther be, then ye co¯te¯platio¯ of this world? and such men as ye be in fauour of god keping his holy co¯mau¯dementes & loue his most blessed testament, receiue far greater pleasure in the syght therof, then thother sorte doo, for while thei behold wyth ouercurious eyes, yt wonderful worke, their mynde   is troubled because they can not compasse for what purpose he doeth such thinges, then thei improue the moost righte and wise gouernour of all and murmour at his doinges as though they were goddes of reprehension: and often finde faute with that lady nature, and saye that she is vnnaturall, whiche taunt forsooth with as muche spite as can bee shewed with woordes, greueth nature: but truely it redoundeth on hym, that made nature, if there bee any at all. But the vertuous man with godly & simple eyes beholdeth with an excedyng reioyce of heart the workes of his Lorde and father highly praysyng the¯ all, and neither reprehe¯deth nor   findeth faut with any of the¯, but for euery thyng yeoueth moste hearty thankes, when he considereth that al were made for the loue of man. And so in all thynges, he praieth vnto the infinite power, deuine wisedome, & goodnes of the maker, wherof he perceiueth moste euident tokens in thynges that bee here created. Now fain that there were suche a palace in verie deede as  Apuleus  faineth, or els one that were more royall and gorgeouse, and that you shoulde take twoo thither with you too beholde it, the one a straunger, whiche gooeth for this intent onely too see the thyng, and the other the seruau¯t or soonne of hym that firste causeth this buyldyng, whether   will haue more delectie in it? the straunger, too whom suche maner of house dooeth nothyng appartain, or the soonne whiche beholdeth with greate ioye and pleasure, the witte, riches, and magnificence of his deerely beloued father, especially when he dooeth consider all this worke was made for his sake. Sp. Your question is too plain: for they most communely that bee of euill condicions, knowe that heauen and all thinges contained therin, wer  made for mannes sake. HEDO. Almoste al knowe that, but some dooe not remembre it, shewyng the¯selues vntha¯keful for the great and exhubera¯t benefittes of god, & al though thei remember it, yet that ma¯ taketh   greater delight in the sight of it whiche hath more loue vnto the maker therof, in like maner as, he more chearfully wyll behold the element whiche aspireth towarde the eternall life. SPV. Your saiynges are muche like too bee true. HED. Nowe the pleasures of feastes dooeth not consist in the delicates of the mouth, nor in the good sauces of cookes, but in health of body and appetite of stomacke. You may not thynke that any delicious person suppeth more pleasauntly hauyng before hym par triches, turtelles, leuerettes, bekers, sturgeon, and lamprayes: then a vertuous man hauyng nothing too eat, but onely bread potage, or wortes: and nothyng   too drynke, but water, single bere, or wyne well alayde, because he taketh these thinges as prepared of God vnto all lyuyng creatures, and that they bee now yeoue¯ vnto him of his gentyll and mercifull father, praier maketh euery thyng too sauour well. The petition in ye begynnyng of dyner sanctifieth all thynges and in a while after there is recited some holy lesson of the woorde of God: whiche more refresheth the minde, then meate the body, and grace after all this. Finally he riseth from the table, not ful: but recreated, not laden, but refreshed: yea, refreshed both in spirit and bodie, thynke you that any chief deuiser of these muche vsed bankets, &   deintye delicaces fareth nowe more deliciously? SPudeus. But in  Venus  there is greate delectacions if we beleue  Arestotell. Hed. And in this behalfe the vertuous manne far excelleth as well as in good fare, wiegh you now the matter as it is, the better a manne loueth his wife, the more he delecteth in the good felow ship and familiaritie that is betwene theim after the course of nature. Furthermore, no menne loue¯ their wiues more vehemently then thei that loue theim eue¯ soo, as Christ loued the churche. For thei that loue the¯ for the desire of bodely pleasure, loue the¯ not. More ouer, the seldomer any man dooeth accompany with his wife, the greater pleasure, it   is to hym afterwarde, and that thyng the wanto¯ poete knew full well whiche writeth, rare and seldome vse stereth vp pleasures. Albeit, the lest parte of pleasure is in the familiare company betwene theim. There is forsothe far greater in the continuall leadyng of their liues too gether, whiche emongest none can be so plesaunt as those that loue syncerely and faithfully together in godly and christian loue, and loue a like one the other. In the other sort, often when the pleasure of ye body decaieth & waxeth old loue waxeth coold & is sone forgotto¯, but emo¯gest right christen men, the more yt the lust of ye flesh decreaseth & vanishethaway, ye more the¯ al godly loue encreseth   Are you not yet perswaded that none lyue more pleasauntly the¯ they whiche liue continually in vertue and true religion of god? SP. Would god all men were as well perswaded in that thyng. He. And if they bee Epicures yt lyue pleasauntli: none bee righter Epicures then they that liue vertuously, and if we wyll that euery thyng haue it right name none deserueth more ye cogname of an Epicure, then that Prince of all godly wisedome too whom most reuere¯tly we ought alwaies too praye: for in the greeke tonge an Epicure signifieth an helper. Nowe whan the lawe of nature was first corrupted with linne, when the law of Moses did rather prouoke euil desires the¯   then remedy them. Wham the tyraunte Sathanas reygned in this worlde freely and wythout punishement, then thys prynce onely, dyd sodenlye helpe mankynde redy to perishe: wherfore thei erre shamefully which scoff and bable that  CHRIST  was one that was sadd and of a malancolye nature, & that he hath prouoked vs vnto an vnpleasaunt kynde of lyfe, for onely he did shewe a kind of liuing most godly and fullest of al true pleasure, if we might haue the stone of  Tantalus  taken awaye from vs. SPVD. What darke saiyng is this? EDO. It is a mery tale too laugh at, but this bourd in duceth verye graue and sadde thynges. SPV. I tary too heare   this mery conceite, that you name too bee so sage a matter. HE Thei whiche gaue their studye and diligence to colour and setfurth the preceptes of Philosophie wyth subtil fables, declare yt there was one  Tantalus  broughte vnto the table of the goddes, whych was euer furnished wyth all good fare, and most nete and sumptuous that myght bee, whan thys straunger shoulde take hys leaue, Iupyter thought it was for his great liberalitie and highe renoume, that his guest shuld not depart wythout some rewarde, he wylled him therfore too aske what he woulde, and he shoulde haue it:  Tantalus{us}  (forsooth) lyke a verye leude and foolyshe person,   for that he sette all the felicitie and pleasure of man in the delectation of the bely, and glotonye, desired but only too sytte at suche a table all the dayes of hys life, Iupiter graunted him his desire, and shortly his vow was there stablished and ratifyed.  Tantalus  nowe sytteth at the table furnyshed wyth all kindes of delicates, such drinke as the goddes druncke of was set on the table, and there wanted no rooses nor odours that could yeoue any swete smel before the Goddes,  Ganymedes  the buttler or one lyke vnto hym, standeth euer redye, the  Muses  stande rounde aboute syngyng pleasauntly, mery  Silenus  daunseth, ne ther wanted noo fooles   too laugh at, and breuely, there there was euerye thynge that coulde delyght any sence of ma¯ but emongist all these,  Tantalus  sytteth all sadde, syghyng, and vnquiet with hym selfe, neither laughing nor yet touching such thynges as were set before hym SPVDE. What was the cause? HED. Ouer his head as he sate there hanged by an hecre a great stone euer lyke too fall. SPV. I woulde then haue conueied my selfe from suche a table. HEDO But his vowe had bound hym too the contrarye, for Iupyter is not so easye too intreate as oure  GOD,  which dooeth vnloose the pernitious vowes of menne, that bee made contrary vnto his holy woord, if thei bee   penitent and sorye therfore, or elles it myght bee thus, the same stoone that woulde not suffer hym too eate, would neither suffer hym to ryse, for if he had but ones moued he shuld haue been quashed al in peeses with the fall thereof. SPVDE. You haue shewed a very mery fable HEDON. But nowe heare that thing, which you wil not laugh at: the commune people seeke too haue a pleasaunt life in out warde thynges, where as noothyng can yeoue that, but onely a constant and a quiet mind: for surely a far heuier stone hangeth ouer these yt grudge with them selues, then hanged ouer  Tantalus:  it only hangeth not ouer them, but greueth and oppresseth   the mynde, ne the mind is not troubled wyth any vayn hoope, but looketh euery houre to bee caste in too the paynes of hell, I praye you what can bee so pleasaunt emongist all thinges that bee yeouen vnto man, that coulde reioyse the mynde, whyche were oppressed wyth suche a stoone? SPVDE. Truely there is nothyng but madnes, or elles incredulitie. HEDO. Yf younge menne woulde weygh these thynges, that bee quyckly prouoked and entised with pleasure as it were wyth the cuppe of  Circes,  whiche in steade of theyr greatest pleasures receiue poysone myxte wyth honye. Howe circumspecte would they bee too doo anye thynge vnaduisedly   yt shoulde grudge their mindes afterward? What thinge is it that thei would not doo too haue suche a godly treasure in store against their latter daies? that is a minde knowyng it selfe cleane & honest and a name that hath not been defiled at any time. But what thyng now is more miserable then is agee? Whan it beholdeth, and loketh backward on thinges yt be past seeth plainly with great grudg of conscience howe fayre thynges he hathe despiced and sette lyght by, (that is, howe farre he hath discented and gone astray from the promyses made vnto God in baptime) & agayn, how foule & noughty thinges he hath clipped and enbraced, and wham   hee looketh forwarde, hee seeth then the daye of iudgemente drawe neere, and shortely after the eternall punyshemente of of hell. SPVDE. I esteme theim most happie whych haue neuer defyled theyr youthe, but euer haue increased in vertu, til thei haue coomne vnto the last puincte of age. HEDO. Next them thei ar too bee commended that haue wythdrawne theim selues from the folie of youth in tyme. SPVDE. But what councel wil you yeoue agee that is in suche great myserie. HEDO. No man shoulde dispayre so long as life endureth, I wyl exhorte him to flee for helpe vnto the infinitie mercye & gentilnes of God. SP. But the longer yt he hath liued   the heape of his synnes hath euer waxen greate and greater, so that nowe it passeth the nomber of the sandes in the sea, HE But the mercies of our lord far excede those sa¯des, for although the sande can not bee numbred of manne, yet hit hath an ende, but the mercie of God neither knoweth ende, ne measure. SP. Yea but he hath no space that shall dye by and by, HEDONI. The lesse tyme he hath the more ferue¯tly he should cal vnto god for grace, that thyng is long inough before God, whiche is of suche power as too ascende from the yearth vnto heaue¯, for a short prayer forsoth streght entreth heaue¯, if it bee made with a vehement spirit. It is written, ye     ye woman synner spoken of in the gospell did penaunce al her life dayes: but with how fewe wordes again did the thief obtain Paradise in the houre of death? If he will crye with hearte and mynde, God haue mercie on me after thy great mercie: God wil take awaye from hym  Tantalus  stone and yeoue in his hearyng ioye and comfort and his bones humiled throughe contrition, wil reioyse that he hath his synnes for yeouen hym. FINIS.