A POEM UPON THE Imprisonment of Mr. Calamy IN NEWGATE. By  Robert Wild,  D. D. Author of the late  Iter Boreale. THis Page I send you Sir, your  Newgate  Fate Not to condole, but to congratulate. I envy not our Mitred men their Places, Their rich Preserments, nor their richer  Faces : To see them Steeple upon Steeple set, As if they meant that way to Heaven get. I can behold them take into their Gills A dose of Churches, as men swallow Pills, And never grieve at it: Let them swim in Wine While others drown in tears, I'le not repine; But my heart truly grudges (I confess) That you thus loaded are with happiness; For so it is: And you more blessed are In  Peters  Chain, than if you fate in's Chair. One Sermon hath preferr'd you to such Honour, A man could scarce have had from Bishop  Banner ; Whilst we (your Brethren) poor Erraticks be, You are a glorious fixed Star we see. Hundreds of us turn out of House and Home, To a safe Habitation you are come. What though it be a Goal? Shame and Disgrace Rise only from the Crime, not from the Place. Who thinks reproach or injurie is done. By an Eclipse to the unspotted  Sun ? He only by that black upon his brow Allures spectators more; and so do you. Let me find Honey, though upon a Rod, And prize the Prison, where the Keeper's  God : Newgate  or  Hell  were  Heaven  if Christ were there, He made the Stable so, and Sepulchre. Indeed the place did for your presence call; Prisons do want persuming most of all. Thanks to the Bishop and his good Lord Mayor, Who turn'd the Den, of Thieves into a House of Prayer: And may some Thief by you converted be, Like him who suffer'd in Christs company. Now would I had fight of your Mittimus; Fain would I know why you are dealt with thus. Jaylor, set forth your Prisoner at the Bar, Sir, you shall here what your offences are. First, It is prov'd that you being dead in Law (As if you car'd not for that death a straw) Did walk and haunt your Church, as if you'd scare Away the Reader and his Common-Prayer. Nay 'twill be prov'd you did not only walk, But like a  Puritan  your  Ghost  did talk. Dead, and yet Preach! these  Presbyterian  slaves Will not give over Preaching in their Graves. Item,  You playd the Thief, and if't be so, Good reason (Sir) to  Newgate  you shall go: And now you're there, some dare to swear you are The greatest Pick-pocket that ere came there: Your Wife too, little better than your self you make, She's the Receiver of each Purse you take. But your great Theft, you act it in your Church, (I do not mean you did your Sermon lurch, That's crime  Cononical ) but you did pray And preach, so that you stole mens hearts away. So that good man to whom your place doth fall, Will find they have no heart for him at all: This Felony deserv'd Imprisonment; What can't you  Nonconformists  be content Sermons to make except you preach them too; They that your places have, this Work can't do. Thirdly, 'tis prov'd, when you pray most devout For all good men, you leave the Bishops out: This makes Seer  Sheldon  by his powerful spel Conjure and lay you safe in  Newgate -hell: Would I were there too, I should like it well. I would you durst swaft punishment with me; Pain makes me fitter for the company Of roaring Boyes; and you may lie a bed, Now your Name's up; pray do it in my stead, And if it be deny'd us to change places, Let us for sympathy compare our cases; For if in suffering we both agree. Sir, I may challenge you to pity me; I am the older Goal-bird; my hard fate Hath kept me twenty years in  Cripple-gate ; Old  Bishop Gout,  that Lordly proud disease, Took my fat body for his Diocess, Where he keeps Court, there visits every L And makes them ( Levite -like) conform to him, Severely he doth Article each joint, And makes inquiry into every point: A bitter enemy to preaching; he Hath half a year sometimes suspended me: And if he find me painful in my station, Down I am sure to go next Visitation: He binds up, looseth; sets up and pulls down; Pretends he draws ill humours from the Crown: But I am sure he maketh such ado, His humors trouble Head and members too: He hath me now in hand, and ere he goes, I fear for  Hereticks  he'le burn my toes. O! I would give all I am worth, a fee, That from his jurisdiction I were free. Now Sir, you find our sufferings do agree, One Bishop clapt up you, another me: But oh! the difference too is very great, You are allow'd to walk, to drink and eat, I want them all, and never a penny get. And though you be debar'd your liberty, Yet all your Visitors I hope are free, Good men, good women and good Angels come And make your Prison better than your home. Now may it be so till your foes repent They gave you such a rich Imprisonment. May for the greater comfort of your lives, Your lying in be better than your Wives. May you a thousand friendly papers see, And none prove emptie, except this from me. And if you stay, may I come keep your door, Then farewel Parsonage, I shall ne're be poor. FINIS.