THE WHORES PETITION To the London Prentices. CLear was the day though it prov'd blustring weather When the rude Rout in Tumults got together, When little Boys would prove the first Beginners To vend their fury upon poor frail  Sinners. Moor-fields  the Stage on which they Act their Fury, Making themselves both  Plaintiffes, Judge  and  Jury. Arriving soon unto that desperate height, By crooked ways to seek to make things  streight. Sure little good can on their Actions border, Who by  Confusion  will put things in  Order. Much harm by such Acts evermore Commences, Sinners  always will have  Saints  pretences. When first by hallowing their Mis-rule was budding, They'd play the Fools too as well as  Jack Pudding : Though their designs did not together hit, The one fool'd for Money, th'others for want of Wit, Sad was the  Omen  of their furious hope First thing they meddle with to be a  Rope, It is bad jesting with  edge-tools  we say, A Rope began, a Rope may end the Fray. When they had spoil'd the  Vaulters  of their Tools, They then must go to pull down  Vaulting-Schools, The Whores  Dark  Actions then must come to  Light, And by  wrong  doings, they will set things  Right. Houses by  Moor-fields,  and  Whetstones Park  them, They were not  Noble  to them, so to  Mark  them Angels  of darkness did inhabite in them, And they were routed as the  Devil  had been them. Those  Feather-beds  which had been instrumental For acting Lust, to ruine then were bent all. The  Sheets  themselves did Pennance,  Curtains  and  Valence, Were  open  shown for  hiding  Leacherous Dalliance. Chairs  and  Windows  broken; work was made Both for the  Joyners ; and the  Glaziers  Trade: Such alterations did this mischief bring, Summer  Houses were made in time of  Spring. Thus when the Rout takes on them to bear sway, The weaker must perforce the strong obey. The  Whores  did to their  Ruiners  yeeld submission, And humbly offer to them this  Petition. The  PETITION. WE do desire you to use fairer-Play, Then turn us out of Doors 'fore  Quarter-day ; And that which unto us is much more harming, Thus to Eject us and to give no warning. Had you told us before of your intention We should not now our grievance to you mention; We would have eased you of all your trouble, And all this storm should but have prov'd a Bubble. Our charges (tis well known) are very great For gallant Clothes to make us seem Compleat; Besides our Paint doth us some Money cost, Shall all our charges thus by you be lost? How shall the  Broker,  and the  Brewer  be paid? Think you the  Strong-water  man will be delay'd? They for to hunt us out will never lin, Can we pay  Out  and have no comings  IN ? No, we'r resolv'd although they nere so mind us, Togo where neither they nor you shall finde us. What think you then does all your stir arrive at, If publick we can't trade, we'l do it private. Yet let us wish you to forbear such storming, Least it to you as well as us prove mourning. The pulling down our houses were pretences, Onely to colour your more soul offences, When you had ruin'd us, we soon should see, Others should in like manner ruin'd be; And so this City (glory of our Nation) By this might have been brought to desolation. Ye rail on us because we fouly deal, Yet take upon you for to rob and steal. Was not our Plate and Linnen too the price Purchas'd from us by your soul Avarice. Yet would not that have serv'd your turn, when grown To a more head, and no resistance shown. Ist not a fine age that we do live in, When  Vice  shall undertake to punish  Sin, We do not justifie our selves, yet must Account that  Theft's  a sin as well as  Lust. We know our crimes are bad, and tis a curse, To punisht be, by them which commit worse. Does not this  Mazanello's  Acts revive? To think that he in  London  were a live. To see a Rout without all sence or Order Run madding up and down in every border? Can evil  May-day  be so quite forgot To think this was not such another Plot! What sullen Planet you so fouly led, That such dire mischiefs should by you be bred? Then leave such tricks which unto mischiefs tends, And for our Councell henceforth count us friends.