The Subtile Damosel. Or, Good Counsel for Maids. Wherein she shews to every Maiden fair, To take heed of false young men wherever they are: For Frummety  Dick  doth love well the Kettle, And porrige pot  Will  is a man of great mettle. To the Tune of,  the new made Gentlewoman,     I Once had a Servant, as other Maids have That pretented to love me but he proved a knave: He thought by his tricks to overcome me, But I was as cunning and crafty as he. His tongue was so tipt with temptations that I Out of his presence or sight could not lie; He call'd me his hony, his duck and his dear: But now his words to me he doth them forswear, But now I am frée from him, I'm glad in my heart: Its never be said, I will mourn When we part: But unto all Maids now the truth I will show To take héed of false young men wherever they go. I'th' first place take heed, and beware what I say  For when you are bound, they'l force you to obey: Nere trust a man that hath a red Nose, Before he'l want his liquor he'l pawn your best cloaths: There's  Dick  came and  Harry: both  Robin  and  Will Have showed themselves clowns, and so they'l be still: For  Peter  at dancing he put them all down But  John  kist the best of all men in the Town. But though I did promise him and count him the best Yet he can dissemble as well as the rest: From eightéen to thirty these young men I mind Loves a wench in a corner, if they can them find. For this I'm resolved, and so  I  say still, There's not one amongst twenty but he both prove ill: Search every City and Town you shan't see A man that proves constant and faithful to be Though  John  of good mettle, and counted so civil, At a Frumme y Kettle he'l fight with the Devil: Or at long spoon and custard he's a right honest man: But  I  have forsook him then love him who can. There's  Bob  a good fellow to give him his due: Such a young man again I think there is but few: Yet with one disease he is troubled  I  smell, If he méet with a wench, he can't kiss her but tell. Also came the Taylor and the Weaver  I  discern, The one is for Shreds, the others for Yarn: These two boon Companion work hard I do see, And they'r striving which of them the best thief will be, Last  Valentines  day I met with my Dear, He took me by the hand, and lead me to the Fair: He gave me fine fairings, to kiss me was bold: But at last I do give him the dog for to hold, His eloquent spéeches could do him no good, I  can give him fair words, and then leave i' th' mud: He talkt of déep learning, but  I  did him tell That he went to school in some bottomless well. The world now adaies it is come to that pass, That every Boy now doth look for a Lass: Theres Bacon-fac'd  Harry as short as my thumb, All arse and no body, Sing come pudding come. These young men & more of them which  I  could name, To wrong pretty Maidens they think it no shame. But what shou'd we speak on't? it oft has been tri'd, That honest young men they cannot abide. Thus Maids have  I  told you some part of my mind, How 'tis very heard a good Husband to find. Though my Love hath left me, to grieve  I  ne'er shall: If the rest prove no better, old Nick take them all By J. Wade Finis.