Dr WILD's Humble Thanks For His MAJESTIES Gracious DECLARATION for Liberty of Conscience, March 15. 1672. No, not one word, can I of this Great Deed, In  Merlin,  Old Mother  Shipton  read! Old  Tyburn  take those  Tychobrahe  Imps, As  Silger,  who would be accounted Pimps To the Amorous Planets; they the Minute know, When  Jove  did Cuckold old  Amphitryo, en  Mars  and made  Venus  wink and glances, Their close Conjunctions, and mid-night Dances. When costive  Saturn  goes to stool, and vile Thief  Mercury  doth pick his Fob the while: When Lady  Luna  leaks, and makes her man Throw't out of Window into th' Ocean. More subtle than the Excise-men here below, What's spent in every Sign in Heaven they know; Cunning Intelligencers, they will not miss To tell us next year, the success of this; They correspond with  Dutch  and  English  Star, As one once did with  CHARLES  and  Oliver. The  Bankers  also might have, had they gone, What Planet governe'd the Exchequer, known. Old  Lilly,  though he did not love to make Any words o 't saw the  English  take, Five of the  Smyrna  Fleet, and if the Sign Had been  Aquarius,  then they'd made them Nine When  Sagitarius  took his aim to shoot At Bishop  Cosin,  he spyed him no doubt; And with such force the winged Arrow flew; Instead of one Church Stagg he killed two; Glocester  and  Durbam  when he espy'd, Let Lean and Fat go together he cry'd. Well  Wille Lilly  thou knew'st all this as well As I, and yet wouldst not their Lordships tell. I know thy Plea too, and must it allow, PRELATES  should know as much of Heaven as thou: But now Friend  William,  since its done and past, Pray thee, give us  Phanaticks  but one Cast, What thou foresaw'st of  March  the Fifteenth Last; When swift and sudden as the Angels flye, Th' Declaration for Conscience-Liberty; When things of Heaven burst from the Royal Breast, More fragrant than the Spices of the East. I know in next year's Almanack thou'lt write, Thou saw'st the King and Council over-night, Before that morn, all sit in Heaven as plain To be discern'd, as if 'twere  Charles's Waine, Great  B,  great  L,  and two great  AA's  were chief Under Great  CHARLES  to give poor  Fan's  relief: Thou sawest Lord  Arlington  ordain the man. To be the first Lay Metropolitan. Thou saw'st him give induction to a  Spittle, And constitute our Brother  TOM-DOE-LITTLE. In the  Bears  Paw, and the  Bulls  right Eye, Some Detriment to Priests thou didst espye; And though by  Sol  in  Libra  thou didst know Which way the Scale of Policy would go; Yet  Mercury  in  Aries  did decree. That  Wool  and  Lamb  should still  Conformists  be. But hark-you  Will,  Steer-poching is not fair; Had you amongst the Steers found this March-Hare, Bred of that lusty Puss the Good Old Cause, Religion rescued from Informing Laws; You should have yelpt aloud, hanging's the end, By Huntsmens Rule, of Hounds that will not spend. Be gone thou and thy canting-Tribe, be gone; Go tell thy destiny to followers none: Kings Hearts and Councils are too deep for thee, And for thy Stars and  Doemons  scrutinie. King  CHARLES  Return was much above thy skill To fumble out, as 'twas against thy will. rom him who can the Hearts of Kings inspire, Not from the  Planets,  came that Sacred Fire Of Soveraign Love, which broke into a Flame; From God and from his King alone it came. To the KING. SO great, so universal, and so free! This was too much great  CHARLES,  except for Thee, For any King to give a Subject hope: To do thus like Thee, would undo the Pope. Yea, tho his Vassals should their wealth combine, To buy Indulgence half so large as thine; No, if they should not only kiss his Toe, But  Clement's Podex,  he'd not let them goe. Whil'st Thou to's shame, Thy immortal glory, Hast freed  All-Souls  from real Purgatory; And given  All-Saints  in Heav'n new Joys, to see Their friends in  England  keep a Jubilee. Suspect them not, Great Sir, nor think the worse; For sudden joys like grief, confound at first. The splendor of your favour was so bright, That yet it dazles and o'rewhelms our sight; Drunk with her cups, my Muse did nothing mind; And until now, her feet she could not find. Greediness makes profa'ness i' th' first place; Hungry men fill their bellies, then say grace. We wou'd make Bonfires, but that we do fear The name of  Incend'ary  we may hear. We wou'd have Musick too, but 'twill not doo, For all the Fidlers are  Conformists  too. Nor can we ring, the angry Churchman swears, (By the King's leave) the Bells and Ropes are theirs. And let 'em take 'em, for our tongues shall sing Your Honour louder than their Clappers ring. Nay, if they will not at this Grace repine, We'l dress the Vineyard, they shall drink the Wine. Their Church shall be the Mother, ours the Nurse. Peter  shall preach,  Judas  shall bear the purse. No  Bishops, Parsons, Vicars, Curates,  we, But only  Ministers  desire to be. We'l preach in Sackcloth, they shall read in Silk. We'l feed the Flock, and let them take the Milk. Let but the  Black-birds  sing in bushes cold, And may the  Jack-dawes  still the Steeples hold. We'l be the Feet, the  Back  and  Hands,  and they Shall be the  Belly,  and devour the  Prey, The Tythe-pigg shall be theirs, we'l turn the spit, We'l bear the  Cross,  they only  sign  with it. But if the Patriarchs shall envy show To see their younger-Brother  Joseph  go In Coat of divers colours, and shall fall To rend it, 'cause it's not Canonical: Then may they find him turn a Dreamer too, And live themselves to see his Dream come true. May rather they and we together joyn In all what each can; But they have the  Coyn : With  Prayers  and  Tears  such service much avail: With  Tears  to swell your  Seas,  with  Prayers  your  Sails ; And with Men too, from both our parties; such I'm sure we have, can cheat, or beat, the  Dutch. A Thousand  Quakers,  Sir, our side can spare; Nay, two or three, for they great  Breeders  are. The Church can match us too with Jovial Sirs, Informers, Singing-men  and  Paraters. Let the King try, set these upon the Decks Together, they will  Dutch  or  Devil  vex. Their Breath will mischief further than a Gun. And if you lose them, you'l not be undone. Pardon dread Sir, nay pardon this coarse Paper, Your License 'twas made this poor Poet caper. ITER BOREALE.