The nevv made Gentlevvoman Or, The dishonest Lady. Writen as true as she did relate How Money made her every Rascal's Mate Likewise she says she's gather'd riches store. By only playing of the private Whore. And now in the Country she's gone, And left me behind to sing this song. To a new Tune, Or,  The Flatteries of Fate.   COme Gallants and lisen unto me a while i'll sing you a song that will make you smile Of one that is pritty, in  London  fair City, And Gentlemens humors she can beguile. My Parents quoth she hath left me forlorn, And told me how  I  was begot in a Barn, But since  I  am to elder years grown To be told of my Parents I hold it in scorn. I got a few Cloaths and to  London I  came, Where quickly my beauty did get me a name; I tell you the truth although you me blame, I now am become a Girl of the Game. The first that come to me he was a Foot-boy, And he gave me a Crown for to call him my Ioy, I lov'd him and joy'd him and honey'd him so That it cost him an Angel before he did go. A Lawyers Clerk was the next that did come, And made me believe that he was a Lords Son, I pleased his mind when  I  found out his play That it cost him a pound before he went away. And many more to me did strait ways Resort, With Gold and with Silver my person to court, That Riches I gather'd by using this Trade After forty had used me I went for a Maid. heart depiction of book WIth silks & with sattings now bravely I go, and waiting maids on me attend, you must know My justico and Black-Patches I were, Which make all admire that on me doth stare. Brave Gallants I promise you doth me adore Not taking me to be a vampified Whore, They'll give me a Guinny if on them I smile, And two for a take-up, thus I them beguile. My Smock it is Cambrick I tell you the truth, And handled by many a prodigal youth I have a fine spring that runeth so clear, That it brings me as good as two hundred a Year. Now I have got Treasure no longer i'll stay But into the Country strait  I  will away, where one of my lovers hath done me much wrong For in a weeks time he did send me this song. The Gentleman's Song that he sent his Lady into the Country. MY Lady is grown so bonny and gay she's gone from the City in the country to play, And by her great fame, she's got such a name, With singing and dancing it makes her go lame. She plaid in the City almost half a year And yet for her wages she's never the near, But a Gallant did say this part you must play Tis thought in some corner that he did her lay. I steering my coast one night in the dark I met with a Frigot that sail'd towards the Park She haisted up sail and away she did run I  sée her cast Anchor at the Prince in the Sun. I  gave her a Guinny to enter her Fort She presently yielded to come to the sport, But finding me lasie strait bid me begone I  gave her a shot, but she fir'd my Gun. And thus  I  was conquer'd and forc't to retire For she gave me a Clap against my desire she makes me go stradling with swelling my eggs you may drive a wheel-barrow betwéen my 2 legs. But now her beauty is almost decayd, which makes her to paint for to hold up that trade, with false locks & vizard masks she has great skil, But she's known for a whore let her go where she will, By L.W.