The Widdows Rant, Or a  Wedding-Song,  upon Widdow  Jackson  in  Borthuicks-Closs. Composed by one of her own SEXES. 1. ALL ye Wifes in this Town Thats moved for your Men, And ye that puts on Mourning deep When they are dead for them; 2. And cryeth O my dear Since thou art from me gone, To no Man else I'll Wedded be But live single alone. 3. Detain your selves from sobs, And barken to my call, I'le tell you of a Chast Widow The Honour of you all; 4. It doth not much exceed A Moneth or five weeks space, Since she put on her mourning Weed And fiegned her face; 5. And so her Neighbour said, When she was Mourning sore, Ye are a Widdow now indeed And woe is us therefore. 6. Said she hold ye your peace And be not troubled sore, For though my man be freely dead; I am even as before; 7. For when he was alive Although he lay me near, Nevertheless a Widdow I Have been more then ten year. 8. But Notwith standing she For him hath tane such care, That sleep and rest is freely gone From her both late and air. 9. For which she did complain Unro the Pastor then, Because that for her Husbands death She was grieved with pain. 10. But yet her Neighbours dreads That she her self did fain, And says it was but  Tam auld's Fleas That made her seek the Men. 11. It's likewise said by some, That her Man's gan again, And others say that by his Grips They are sting to the Bayne. 12. But whither its because That she hath him forgot. That he is going through the Closs, This truly I know not. 13. Or if it be because, That she hath her Bed Cloathed, With covrings, and with other things, Which he hath wholly loathed. 14. Or if it be indeed, Because that she doth spend, The Mony on Beads, Kalls, and Rings, By which his Son should send. 15. Or if in fine it be, That  Ale  raising their Brain, Makes them see three, where there is  but two Determine if ye can. 16. Nevertheless she hath A remedie procur'd, By which she may be freed from Fleas, And of their sting procur'd. 17. By finding out a Man, That of such things had Skill, As killing Fleas, and healing stings, Which tempted her most ill. 18. But as some ones doth Judge He plasters did apply, Before that he was Graduat, Fearing that she should dye. 19. But least that ye should doubt Of whom I have thus Rim'd I'le tell you Name, and Surname both, That I may ease your mind. 20. She is a Lustie Wife, and thinks her self no dross, Her Name's call'd  Nansie Cruck shanks, She lives in  Borthuicks-Closs. FINIS.