Doctor COOPER at Work Upon  DAUNCEY'S  Bones: AND COOK licking his FINGERS After his  Dose  and  Pill. O For the  Doctor's lines,  or  Cleveland's, Dauncey To truss thee in, how bravely would I haunse thee, Then like a Jack o'  Lent  the first of  March, In  Cuerpo  thou should'st hang under some  Arch, There to be play'd on by the wind, and noise Of  Fish-wives, Orange-wenches,  and the  Boyes. Was't not enough the brethren felt his whip So smart and keen, but he must make thee skip Thou Jackanapes? think'st thou, thou piteous elf, To draw his anger on thy single self, And rescue so a number? foul-mouth no, You are beneath him, hee's more worth than so. Lord, what a holy thing is want of clothes. How it keeps  Balladers  from drink and oaths! When there's no more to pawn, an oath were vain, Your words will go as far in  Chart'r 'ouse  lane. Thou seem'st boy to have taken his advice And gone to school agen, and thou art wise In doing so, thou may'st be of his stables, Th'art at the Dunghill now in  AEsop's Fables. Your mine's Hell deep, we give a guesse what's in't, Poets w'are sure send nothing to the mint. W'are pleas'd to see you wince, y'ave a gauld hide, Your own breath stinks when 'tis to you apply'd. If your own words refounded be accurst, Your meaning was not wholsome at the first. Mark how this saucy  Rascal  'gins his prate, As though the Doctour were an advocate OF foul debauchery: when in no mans hearing He ever spoke of drunkennesse or swearing; Nor thinks there can be such a sin in fashion I'th Clergy, 'ts hatch'd in your Imagination: There 'tis ye slanderous villains that ye frame An odious abuse, and then declame. So I have seen a Coward draw his sword Against a Post, and every blow a word; Now if thou wer't a man,  I 'de have thee here, And then again he cryes I'de have thee there. Bring forth your  swearers,  and your  drunkards  too, Or on my word this Knight o'th post are you. I a've a  Physician  that without perhaps Shall cure your mouth secure of  after claps. Down o' your knees, thank God, and thank me too, 'Tis well, 'tis well, now  Gallows  claim thy due; And when the Surgeons chest has brought you sir Back from that tree, into their Theatre, The Doctor for a Lecture shall not stick, To send your bones unto the Devil to pick. You might have seen, had you been so inclin'd, (But as the saying is,  hasty Currs are blind ) The  Doctor  knew your  Asse's  meaning sir, And needs not you for an Interpreter. We like no coxeing friend, nor ever will, Joab  and  Judas  both did kisse and kill. Had  Griffin  bray'd against a man or two, Or on a County where such things they do, His Libel might have gone untax'd: but now To write at randome thus, and to allow A roving Kite with full spread wings to fly Over the Nation, carrying infamy Thus undetermin'd;  Dauncey  'tis too much, Ill minds conclude the  Clergy  all are such. This mischief he has done, and as we mention, We had but's own word for his good intention. This has your pious soul done, that can't drink Yon say, but shall  I  tell you what  I  think? What  I  have heard?  Danncey  I will take leave, For all your  affidavit,  t'undeceive My silly Countrymen, who live in doubt Some Minister of worth set this Cry out; Whose spirit bleeds within him for the sin That yet the people, and the Clergy's in. But come chear up my hearts, 'tis no such matter, This fellow in Divinity does but smatter, Hangs on the  Presse,  and as his learning's small, His pay's ten groats a ballad, and some Ale: Which not one Stationer alone does pay for But all the Crowd, which he goes first to stay for; The Common spunge, a fellow of no reck'ning, Shall follow you to an Alehouse but for beck'ning. And be brought out agen perhaps. But How! What do I see,  Dauncey,  the grizly brow Of Goblin  Truth,  Fathers in  Truth,  the thing Undid the Church, and cut the throat o'th King? Choak us no more you R—with your minc'd meat, Fathers,  feed's at discretion, we will eat, I and give thanks too for your institution, And call you fathers without diminution, Conservers of Gods Oracles, bring these fellows Truth to confesse, where they should do't to'th Gallows. And mark it  Dauncey,  see how thou art catch'd, As if thine own lye to betray th'adst watch'd; When with comparison thou would'st up-cry The faith of  Griffin,  As hath no reply. But Mr.  Dauncey,  now y'ave shew'd your lack Of wit and art, let me again go back, And view the subject of your declamation Not against things, but vices  O this Nation. Are vices nothing? and's all this ado Made about nothing, by you Puppies two. Now you begin to belch up your disgrace, And spit foul Language in the  Doctor's  face; VVhat are you proud of, that you thus  be-Asse us, And knave us bluntly, is't Land in  Parnassus ? Who would not swear you'r drunk? it is no ruth To conscience for a man to swear the Truth. Would'st thou know what thou art? thou canst not miss't, In the first Chapter of the  Alchymist, Where  Sub l, Doll,  and  Face  do seem to me Rayling, to conjure for a name for thee. There read thy self, th'are thine all, and if't be Thy chance to scape a sadder destiny, VVhen with the  Stationers  thou hast suck'd so long Scot-free of Ale, as t'other has, whose tongue Thou now defendest, mayst thou by good prayers Rise by degrees, from Link-boy, to the Players; To be their book-keeper, and then grown bold, Upon thy parts, when thou art blind and old, Presume to write a play in thy last age, And have it basely hiss'd off o' the stage, For which thy heart must break, if it break not This minute, for thus having play'd the Sot. We are ingenuous, and do not deride Your poverty, you Knaves, no, but your pride; And cannot choose but laugh, to see the Saints Have drunken Atheists to defend their plaints. So  exit Dauncey.  — Now comes  Cook  in fury, Lick-spit o'th Law: speak sirrah to the Jury, There you may find a dozen of the name You give the Doctor, (Caterpillar of fame:) Beat me this Buckram Rogue,  Falstaffe,  to seven. Nay if thou wilt, beat him into eleven, And if they have no better manners then, Send them to me, I'le beat them all agen. Knaves that do nought but quirk upon his Calling, And quit their cause; 'tis time the Asse left bawling. Martial.  Ep. Dic tandem aliquid de tribus Capellis.