THE KINGS ENTERTAINMENT BY THE CITY of LONDON. Sol radiis orbem illuminat, REX  RBEM. MY  Muse,  whose Modesty still dis-allaw'd To shew her bashful Face in publick Crowd, But like a Vailled Vestal, since the Fire, Had laid aside her melancholly Lyre; This day of  Jubilee  Once more commands To take, and tune with her unskilful hands. Last night, fair  Cynthia  did to  Thetis  ride To bid the  Nymph  bring in an Early  Tyde, Whose swelling Surface might next Morning bear, And wait upon New- Londons  New  Lord-Mayor ; While the bright  Barges  on the  River  Glide, And the Glad  Fishes  Frisk on every side, Hearing the  Cornet, Flute, Waites, Trumpets  play, Dancing in spite of  Net,  or  Line  that Day, While the  Flaggs  flutter, and the  Streamers  fly, The glorious  Badges  of each  Company : And each big  Barge  by in proud Pomp doth-Ride, Seeming to shoulder out the narrow Tyde: And all the while, the bank-bred  Nymphs  fair eye, With stately Grace veiwing this  Shew  swim by; And having bid them  Welcome  back to  Shore With usual Eccoh of the Cannon roar, From the fair  Thames  she turns her comely Face, Next to behold, with a yet greater Grace, The Reverend  Train,  while a long stately row Of  Beauteous † Buildings,  grace them as they go; Which leads them in a streight, and even Line, To the  Great Hall,  where this  Great Train  must Dine. New Kings Street But stay; If it be true which I did hear, The  MASTER  of this  Mistress  will be there: Nor does he private come, or come alone, But like a Glorious Constellation Brings with him here, as brave and bright a  Train, As ere was seen to wait on  CHARLES  his Wain. Will the  KING  Come! (Dear Prince !) Will Great  CHARLS  Come ! Methinks the Close-joyn'd Buildings Croud for Room; And the  Ambitious Streets,  with graceful stride, Do seem to stretch to make themselves more wide; While all the way along, you'd think each head By people pav'd for common stones instead, Methinks I hear the  Crowd  inquisitous Which are the  Pageants,  taking every house That sumptuous high and s;tately seem to be For their expected gaz'd at  Pageantry, With fair and beauteous  Nymphs,  richly bedeck'd, Who from  Belconies, Windows,  down reflect Their Beams of Beauty, while from Ladyes Eyes, Cupid  fling;  Wild-Fire,  fast as  Serpent  flyes: Which wonder in a Lady's not so rare, As for to see a  Lord-May'rs-Day  prove Fair. Could Clouds more kind unto a  Tryumph  be, Than to hold up at this  Solemnity ? Which makes the  Forrest-Beasts  abroad to creep, Who durst not else, but in their dark Dens sleep: And if you'd take the  Poets  apt Comment, That  moving Wilderness  did represent The Emblem of Poor  London,  when of late, A fatal  Fire  made her all  Desolate : A Place for  Satyrs  onely fit to Dance; (Which Heaven, beyond our Hopes, doth now Advance) Of late for  Leopards, Tygers, Wolves,  to dwell, And every  Vault  for lurking Theeves, a Cell. Many there be, that doe its  Burning  Rue; Thousands be bound to bles;s its  Building  New: To after-times, the Wonder will be one, Its Burning  Down,  and Building up so  Soone. Rous;e Glorious  Phaenix,  shake thy dusty Wing, And then like  Caesars  Eagle, meet thy KING: Thy KING, whose  Grief, Joy, Care,  and  Love  thou art, For as thou art his  Kingdom's,  thou'rt his  Heart. When  Thou  didst  Suffer,  did thy Dear KING Mourn, More than did he that saw his own  House  Burn; Whose.  Teares,  Heaven in a Sacred  Chalice  Kept, Which Waiting Angels caught fast as he  Wept : Which when Heaven found enough to slake his  Ire, He Sprinkled on the  Ashes  of the  Fire. As in thy  Griefs,  So in thy  Joy,  he Shares, And with his Royal Beames, his People Cheares, While the Glad, Grateful City back Express, Their raptur'd Sense of this High Happiness, By  Feasting, Masking, Musick,  publick  Sights, That either  Palat, Ear,  or  Eye  Delights. Ah PRINCE! Accept her  Love,  although Express'd Like a Surprized Lady, half Undress'd, While she Poor  Lady  (do not think it Pride) Would her Red Cheekes behind the  Tap'stry  Hide. This is her first  Up-sitting,  from a Fall, Like to have Prov'd her Utter  Funeral, Had not Your  Sacred Succour  help'd to Reer Her to this Strength and Health wherein You See'r. And could She then, do less unto her KING, Than to Invite Him to her  Gossipping ? The Conclusion to the Right Honourable the Lord Mayor. THis City, SIR, in your Time had that Honour, Long time laid by, again Conferr'd upon Her: This  Lady City.  (Europes Chiefest Pride) Which to Atchieve, you Her S.  GEORGE  did Ride; That after Ages, when they find that Name 'Mong the Restorers of  Lost Londons  Flame, St.  George,  his  Dragon,  and his Bloody  Cross, Men shall disown, and say, That  You  it was, That were the  Champion ; and unto your Glory, You have TWO  Draggons  to Support the Story, S. Wiseman.