The willy, witty, neat, and pritty, Damsell:   VVhich to a Souldier often made this answer,   I dare not doe no more nor the back of your hand Sir, To the tune of,  The Oyle of Barly.     NOt long agone, Walking a one, Abroad to take the aire, Vnder a shaid, I spyd a Maid, Both beautifull and faire re t h a t quoth I, In courticy, To make me som thing boulder, Exchange a kisse, And donot misse, With me that am a Souldier, Which she deni'd, And thus repli'd, Being ready with her answer, Forbeare to woe, For I dare not doe, No more nor the back of your hand Sir. What is the cause My bony Lasse, That thou shouldst now deny mee I in my Love Will constant prove, If thou'st be pleas'd to try mee Then about the wast, I her embrast, And in plaine termes I told her, I would her beed, And also weed, If she would love a Souldier, Which she deni'd &c. Ile give thee Rings, And costly things, Fine brasle s of rich amber, If that my will, Thou wilt fullfill, And walke into my chamber, There may we prove. The tricks of Love, And I shall be more bolder, When as I see, Thou wilt agree, To Love a valiant Souldier, Which she, &c. Ile deck thee brave And thou shalt have, Bo h danty faire and clothing, My love to thee, Shall be so free, Ile let thee want for nothing, In garments gay, Each holy day, Thou shalt both pearle & Gold were Like Loves faire Queene, Thou shall be seene, If thou wilt wed a Souldier, Which she &c. A Bever hat, Be sure of that, Ile for a faring give thee, A Silken gowne, With Lace lade downe, Sweet heart thou maist believe me Warme Muffes, new Ruffes, Bone lece and Cuffes, Most gorgious to behold sure, If thouls love mee, As ice love thee, Belive me as Souldier, Which she &c. The second part, To the same Tune. A Souldiers wife Lives a merry life. And 'tis a tpye of honour, In every place, To have the grace Of Mistr s put upon her. Which honour brave, Thy selfe shall have, Then prethy Love be bolder, Be not so coy, Let me inioy, Thy love and be a Souldier, Which she denied, And thus replied Being ready with his answer, Forbare to woe, For I dare not doe, No more nor the back of your hand Sir. If I quoth she, Should wéed with thée, We both might faile in carrage, My age is gréene, I'me scarce fiftéene, 'Tis a little to young for marriage, Without delay, I meane to stay, Tell I am somthing older, I find as yet, I am unfit, To meddle with a Souldier, Therefore away, &c, There are young men, Both now and then, Whose wits are very nimble, They'le cog they'le lie, They'le falcyfie, They'le flatter and desemble, Vntell they have. What they do crave, And after wards they care not, Therefore be still, I'ft be your will, To trust you Sir I dare not, Forbeare quoth she, I pray let be, Take this word for an answer, Although you woe I will not doe, No more nor the back of your hand Sir. I in some part: Could find in heart, To leave for thee my dear, My maden head, Which I have kept, Almost this fifteene yeare, But if with shame, Yould staine my name, It would be my undoing Wherefore kind Sir, I pray stand farre, And leave your desprat wo Pish fie be gone, Let me alone, Take this word for an answe Forbeare to woe, For I dare not doe, No more nor the back of your han   . I knew a Maid, That wat betraid, Her name was pritty  Nelly, A young man staid, And with her plaid, Till be got up her belly, Which being done. Away he rune, He being but a stranger, Which makes me say, As well I may, Much trusting breeds much danger Therefore &c. When I had beene, So long and seene, This Damsells disposion, We both departed, Merry hearted, She having made condision, For me to stay, Vntell the day, That I returne from  Gloster, To end all strife, Shee'le be my wife, She sayes what ere it cost her, And thus the jeast, I have exprect, &c.