A VVomans VVork is never done Here is a Song for Maids to sing, Both in the Winter and the Spring; It is such a pretty conceited thing, Which will much pleasure to them bring. Maids may sit still, go, or run, But a Womans work is never done. To a delicate Northern Tune,  A Womans work is never done,  Or,  The Beds making.     AS I was wandring on the way, I heard a married Woman say, That she had lived a sollid life, Ever since the time that she was made a wife. For why (quoth she) my L bor is hard, And all my pleasures are debarr'd: Both Morning, Evening-Night and Noon, I'm sure a Womans work is never done. And now (quoth she) I will relate, The manner of my woful Fate; And how my self I do bestow, As all my Neighbours well do know: And therein all that will it hear, Vnto my song I pray a while give ear; Ile make it plainly to appear right soon, How that a Womans work is never done. For when that I rise up early in the morn, Before that I my head with dressings adorn, I swéep & cleanse the house as néed doth require Or if that it be cold, I make a fire: Then my Husbands breakfast I must dress, To fill his belly with some wholesom mess; Perhaps thereof I eat a little or none, But I'm sure a Womans work is never done. Next thing that I in order do, My children must be lookt unto; Then I take them from their naked beds, To put on their clothes and comb their heads: And then what hay soever do beside, Their breakfast straight I must provide. Bread cries my Daughter, and drink my Son, And thus a Womans work is never done. And when that I have fill'd their bellies full, Some of them I pack away to School, All save one sucking Childe, that at my brest Doth knaw and bite, and sorely me molest: But when I have laid him down to sleep, I am constrain'd the house to keep, For then the Pottage-pot I must hang on, And thus a Womans work is never done. The second Part to the same Tune.     ANd when my pottage-pot is ready to hoil, I must be careful all the while; And for to scum the Pot is my desire, Or else all the fat will run i'th fire. But when th'leven a clock bell it doth chime, Then I know 'tis near upon dinner time: To lay the Table-cloth I then do run, And thus a Womans work is never done. When dinner time is gone and over-past, My Husband he runs out o'th doors in haste; He scarce gives me a kiss for all that I Have dealt and done to him so lovingly. Which sometimes grieves me to the heart, To see him so clownishly depart: But to my first Discourse let me go on, To shew a Womans work is never done. There's never a day from morn to night, But I with work am tired quite; For when the game with me is at the best, I hardly in a day take one hours rest: Sometimes I knit, and sometimes I spin, Sometimes I wash, ans sometimes I do wring, Sometimes I sit and sowe by my self alone, And thus a Womans work is never done. In making of the Beds such pains I take, Vntil my back, and sides, and arms do ake; And yet my Husband deals so cruelly, That he but seldom comes to comfort me. And then at night when the clock strikes nine My Husband he will say, 'tis supper time; Then presently he must be waited upon, And thus a Womans work is never done. When Supper's ended to bed we must go, You all do know 'tis sitting it should be so: then do I think to settle all things right, In hope that I shall take some test by night. The biggest of my Children together I lay, And place them by degrees so well as I may: But yet there is a thing to be thought upon, For why a Womans work is never done. Then if my Husband turns me to the wall, Then my sucking Childe will cry and brawl, Sir or seven times for the brest t'will cry, And then I pray you judge what rest take I. And if at any time a sleep I be, Perchance my Husband wakes, & then wakes me; Then he does that to me which I cannot shun, Yet I could with that Work were oftner done. All you merry Girles that hear this Ditty, Both in the Countrey, and in the City; Take good notice of my Lines I pray, And make the use of the time you may: You see that Maids live more merrier lives, Then do the best of married Wives: And thus to end my Song as I begun, You know a Womans work is never done.