THE Witty Maid of the VVest; OR, The  Miller  well thrash'd by  Robin  the Plowman:  For which Service he received a Sum of Money, which bought a Ring and paid for the Marriage betwixt him and his beloved  Nancy. Tune of,  Ladies of  London. This may be Printed, R. P.     William  the Miller, who liv'd in the W st, A lusty stout Lad, brisk and ayry; Now if you will but attend to the Iest, I think it will make you all merry: There was a Lass that used his Mill, Her Name it was pretty fac'd  Nancy; He would be kissing and courting her still, There's no one but she he could fancy. She was a beautifull Lass, I declare, And one that was wonderfull witty: There is not any with her can compare, In Country Town or in City: Nancy  she did the Miller beguile, She knew him a knave by his learing; Pray now have patience, and listen a while, The Story is well worth your hearing. Often he fain would have been at the sport, if  Nancy  she would but be willing, And as the Maiden her self did report, he gave her full twenty good shil ing; She straight did yie d, the case it was thus, the Lass was resolved to cheat him, The twenty Shillings she put in her purse, and said at the Mill she would meet him. Now for to study some joke she did aim, that she in her fancy might glory, Then to her true Love the Plowman she came, and told him the sum of the story: Robin  reply'd, my counsel is this, we won't stand di coursing and arguing, I in a Sack will be carryed as Grist, because you shall stand to your bargain. Master and Man did bitterly Roar, I and for Mercy often did Cry, But she did Thump and Thrash them the more, sure said the Taylors now we shall dye: No ye Rascals I'll not Kill you, but am resolv'd to pay your Arrears, With that she did bru se them, and bitterly use them poor Taylors was ne'r so lugg'd by the Ears. Then they got loose and both run away; Betty  in wrath did vow and protest, That she would send to them the next day, for the Kings Service they should be Prest: Then they were again affrighted, this did create whole Troops of new fears, We'l send now for pitty to good Mistriss  Betty, for Sea-Fights are worse then lugg'd by the Ears. These very Lines the Taylor did send, saying, sweet  Betty  Pardon us now, Though it is true, we once did offend, yet at your feet we'll willingly Bow, Now this day to beg your Pardon, that you may put us out of all fears, We'll never abuse you, but likewise excuse you, although you did lugg us both by the Ears. Now when the Lass had Pardon'd them both, how the poor Rogues did Caper amain, Likewise they ty'd themselves by an Oath, that they would ne'r offend her again: Likewise gave her a Colation, seeing she thus had banish'd their fears, They were not unwilling to spend twenty Shilling, although she had lugg'd them both by the Ears. After the Feast he said to his Man, this has been charges you understand, Therefore take all the care that you can, Easter  and  Whitson Tide  are at hand: For to Cabbidge Silks and Sattins, do not forget to whett up your Shiers: Dear Master ne'r fear it, we'll presently share it, and for time to come, take care of our Ears. FINIS.