 and the Maids Happiness. OR, A pretty Dialogue, between two amorous Lovers. The Young-man Woo'd the Damosel fair, and soon obtain'd her faivour, So they became a loving pair, twas fit that he should have her. For now they sweetly do agree; their minds in nothing vary, But  Thomas  vows hee'l constant bee, unto his pretty  Mary. To the Tune of,  My Father gave mee House and Land.   AS lately I to take the fresh Air; within the fields was walking, There did I espie a Damosel fair, that with a brave Lad was talking. She was indéed a lovely Lass, I never saw a sweeter; And he a gallant young Man was, who with these kind words did greet her. Man. Come hither to me my Amorous Girl, for dearly I do love thée, Thy person is far more precious than Pearl and I prise no one above thée. O! therefore be not coy my dear, thou hast no cause to fly me. Ile do thee no harm, thou néedst not fear then prethée Love sit down by me. And if my suit thou wilt but own, my mind I will discover, And it shall plainly be made known, that I am thy unfeigned Lover. Maid. Hands off good Sir pray let me be gone to me you are but a stranger, And if I should tarry with you all alone, I fear it would breed much danger. But if you really be my friend, and mean no harm to do me; Pray tell me quickly to what end, you have spoken these words unto me. For certainly until that I, by chance came lately hither, In any p ace or company, we two were never together. Man. 'Tis true my Dear, I must confess, thou speakest but what is reason, For I never had the happiness, to see thée before this season. Yet I have heard much of thy worth, by many a true relation, Thy name excéedingly is set forth, with praise and commendation. For in that precious breast of thine, such Vertues rare are dwelling, Thy person seems to be divine, all other far excelling. Thy Beauty it doth shine most clea , and so comely is thy Feature, That thou art admired far and near, to be a most péerless Creature. Thy courtesie to all appears, and thou haste a most lovely Carriage, O! that to rid me of all fears, thou wert joyn'd with me in Marriage For therefore 'tis that hither I come, to do my best endeavour, Resolving never more to go home, until I have gain'd thy favour. THen prethée love let me know thy mind swet let my speeches move thée And let my suit acceptance find, for dearly I do love thée Maid. Your praises are far above my desert, yet I humbly thank you for them, If that they procéed from a faithful heart, for otherwise I do abhor them. But though your words & spéeches be fair, and your tongue runs very nimble, Yet well it behoves me to have a care, for young men they will dissem le. Man. O do not think that I flatter my  but put me unto the tryal, A faithful mind I ever did b ar, and my heart unto thee is loyal. I would not falsifye my words, nor alter my affections, For all the wealth that the world affords for I hate such unworthy actions, My love is wholly fixt on thée, my mind shall never vary, But I will alwayes constant be, unty my lovely  Mary. Then prethée Love let me know thy mind, swéet let my speeches move thee, And let my suit acceptance find, for dearly I do love thee. Maid. Sweet sir I perceive by what you say, you have a desire to Marry, Yet let me be well advis'd I pray, for fear that I should miscary. Such charges goes to a married Life, as are not easily gained, And if that I should become your wife, pray how shall I be maintained. Man. I that my Dear, be all thou dost fear, the matter will soon be decided; For I have five hundred pounds a year, then am not I well provided, When ever thou wants either silver or gold, if that thou dost but crave it, Though it be as much as thy Apron will hold, yet thou shalt quickly have it. Then prethee Love let me know thy mind sweet let my speeches move thee, And let my suit acceptance find, for dearly I do love thes. Maid. Why then sweet Sir, to you I yield, hout any more denial,  kind request shall be fulfill'd, and I hope you will be loyal. Therefore appoint our Wedding day, that as we our troth have plighted, Even so we may, without farther dela be unto each other united. Man. How pleasant is my true Loves voice, like Musick sweet it soundeth, Because thou hast confirm'd my choice, my heart with joy aboundeth Here take my hand thou pretty one, who hast my heart already, I'le constant be to thee alone, my love it is firm and steady. And since thou with me, so well dost agre my pretty amorous Lady, Our Nuptial Rites perform'd shall be, with as much speed as may be. Then will I strive to please my Love, and answer all her wishes, And eke imbrace my Turtle-dove, with thousands of sweet kisses. So shall we live in true content, and never be offended, But spend our days in merryment, until our lives are ended. FINIS.