A Worthy Panegyrick UPON MONARCHY; Written  Anno  M DC L VIII. By a Learned and truly Loyal Gentleman, for Information of the miserably mis-led  Commonwealths-Men  (falsely so called) of that  Deluded Age;  and now revived by  One  that honours the  Author,  and the  Established Government  of these  Nations. I. IF wanting  Wings  one may ascend the  Skies, And  Phoebus  view, without an  Eagles  Eyes; Then  Rouse  up ( Muse ) from thy  Lethargick Strains, And (having first invok'd the  God of Brains ) Let the Grand  Subject  of thy  Measures  be, No  Soul  to  England  like a  Monarchy. Monarchia â Monos Archôn,  The Rule of  one Prince or Governour  without a  Peer,  or the  Government of one man over many.  As in  England & c. II. It is the  Image  of that  Domination, By which  Jehovah  rules the whole  Creation; Angels  nor  Saints,  do in his  Kingdom  share, God  is  Sole-Monarch,  they, but  Subjects  are: Whose  Laws  are such, as when  they  did  Rebel, Sequestred  not, but sent  them  strait to  Hell. III. As  Old,  as that Paternal  Sovereignty, God  plac'd in  Adam,  rul'd his  People  by; Disown'd of  None,  but  them  whose Minds aspire, And Envy ONE should have what  All  desire: For be't a  Few  or  Many  we live under, Such  shall repine, still, whilst not of the  Number. IIII. The  Antients  did a  Monarchy  prefer, Made all their  Gods  submit to  Jupiter; And (when  Affairs  and  Nations  first began) Princes  DECREES were th' only  Laws  of Man; Experience  will avow it, where there's any, One HONEST MAN is sooner found than MANY. V. The  Rational Soul  performs a  Princes  part, She  rules the  Body  by  Monarchick  Art; Poor  Cranes,  and silly  Bees  (with shivering Wings,) Observe their  Leaders,  and  obey  their  Kings: Nature  her self, disdains a  Crowded Throne, The  Body's Monstrous,  has more  Heads  than ONE. VI. Monarchy 's that Politick simple  State, Consists in   nity  (inseparate Pure   entire;) a  Government  that  stands, When others  fall,  touch'd but with  levelling  hands: So  Natural  and with such  Skill  endu'd, It makes ONE  Body  of a  Multitude. VII. In  Order  (wherein  latter things  depend On  former ) that's most  perfect  doth attend On   nity:  But this can never be The  Popular State,  nor  Aristocracy; For where or  All,  or  Many  bear the  Sway, Such  Order,  to  Confusion  leads the way. VIII. A  Monarchy  more quickly doth attain The  End  propos'd; for 'tis the  Single-Brain That  ripens Councel,  and concealeth best Princely  Designs,  'till  Deeds  proclaim 'em blest. Whilst  Numerous Heads  are rarely of  one Mind, Slow  in their  Motion,  lowder than the  Wind. IX. Treason,  nor  Force,  so suddenly divides Th'   nited Strength  that in a  Crown  resides: Sedition  prospers not, it seldom here, Results an  Object  of the  Prince's  Fear: Then when an  Empire, Rome  was ne'r so  strong, Nor  Triumph'd  under other  Rule  so long. X. A  Monarchy  abates those  Feverish Fits Of  Emulation  a  Free-State  begets: A  Prince  cannot his  Reins  so quickly slack, Or  throw  his  Burthen  on anoth   Back: But where so  many Rulers   e Command, The  Work's transferr'd,  and  toss'd  from Hand to Hand. XI. The  People,  or the  Nobles  to debate The  deep Concernments  of a  troubled State, Set  Times  and  Places  have assign'd them, they First  meet,  and then  adjourn  from Day to Day! Whereas a  Monarch,  who by  Nature 's ONE, Deliberates  always, never's  off  his  Throne. XII. But hold! Me thinks I see the three  Estates Conven'd;  thrown open  Prison-Doors  and  Grates, Extinct  our paltry  Jealousies  and  Fears, Grace  offer'd to  All,  but  Cavaliers And—! yet with  Patience  they abound, In Hopes of  Better,  now the  Wheel  go's round. Britannia ab initio mundi semper fuit Regia & Regimen illius simile ille Caelorum. Howel.