The Young Women and Maidens LAMENTATION: OR, Their bitter Sighs and Sorrow to hear the Old Women are prest to go with the Army, while they themselves are slighted and dejected which are able to perform far better Service. Tune of  I marry and thank ye too. Licensed according to Order.     WE Lasses of  London  Town in sorrowfull sort appear, Because the Fates on us do's frown; Old Women are Prest we hear. To wait on the warlike Train, and March in the Van and Rear; But Maids they will not entertain, Old Women are Prest we hear. We would with our Maiden Skill, like  Amazon  Dames appear; But we are unregarded still, Old Women are Prest we hear. 'Tis Reason they should allow, young Lasses to have a share; But Kissing goes by Favour now, Old Women are Prest we hear. We like the sweet tender Dove, could every Souldier Chear; Yet still they slight a Maiden's Love, Old Women are Prest we hear. With Age they do grunt and groan, nay, tremble and quake for fear, yet tell them this, it is all one, Old Women are Prest we hear. I am sure a young Lass can Nurse a Souldier they need not fear; But see the Case is alter'd thus, Old Women are Prest we hear. We'd cuddle them in our Arms, and this will their Spirits chear; Yet notwithstanding all our Charms, Old Women are Prest we hear. Our Sweethearts are march'd away, the which we adore so dear, And we behind are forc'd to stay, Old Women are Prest we hear. We'd kiss and embrace them too, and Love should like Fountains flow, But old Wives they can nothing do, Then why should not Virgins go? Our Glory and Fame shall Ring, and bafflle the proudest Foe, In getting Souldiers for the King, Then why should not Damsels go? Young Heroes that will adorn, the Army in time we know, As being Souldiers bred and born, And why should not Damsels go? To venture who wou'd refuse? there's Glory and Fame you know, And Teeming time we are loath to loose, And why should not Damsels go? The Captains for Females good, may pity and kindness show; Alas! we are all Flesh and Bloud, and have a great mind to go. For why shou'd we stay behind, in sorrowful grief and woe? I hope at length they'll be so kind, to suffer young Maids to go.