The Young-Mans Complaint, Or,  An ANSWER TO The DAMOSELS Tragedy. When Friends deny, and won't comply. but let them suffer smart, We often see such Cruelty, Will break a Lovers heart, To the Tune of,  Charon,  &c. This may be Printed, R. P.       NOw for the loss of my Amorous Iewel, I am surrounded in grief and woe. It was thy Parents unkind and most cruel, which did occasion thy overthrow: For my dear  Nell  I did adore thee, but we was too much kept apart, There was no one that I e're priz'd before thee; thy Death alone does lye near my heart. Farewel the hopes af all peace, joy, and pleasure, I have no comfort; but care and grief, Often in private I weep out of measure. 'tis Death alone must yield me relief: Love, when I first heard of thy Dying, tho' we had long been kept apart, I tore my hair in a passion, and crying this Damsels death will lye near my heart. Down from his Eyes then the tears they did trickle, with many sorrowful sighs, said he, It is well known that I n ver was fickle, for I lov'd none in the world but thee: Had I been suffer'd to come near thee, thou hadst not felt Death's cruel Dart, I would have laid down my life for to cheer thee, for thy Death now does lye near my heart. For many months I did never behold her, this was a sorrow that griev'd me sore, Her unkind Parents had oftentimes told her, that she should never come near me more: Thus did they soon blast all her glory, for when she felt Deaths fatal Dart, I never heard a more killinger story, this Damsels death doth lye near my heart. Then in her absence my poor heart was wounded, for I might not come anear my joy. When I cou'd see her we then was surrounded, in the sweet Raptures of Love and joy: But by her friends we were tormented, so that we felt Loves fatal smart, She by strong Poyson her Passion has vented, this Damsels Death does lye near my heart. As she was dying, poor heart, she did blame me, she knew not very well what she said, Tho' with sad sorrowful sighs she did name me, 'twas not her Love that her life betray'd: For If I might enjoy'd the b essing, she should have never felt the smart, Now am I no hing but torments possessing, this Damosels Death doth lye near my heart. This sad Distration so much doth inthrall me, that I am restless both night and day, Methinks I often hear my Lover call me, sa ing sweet  Johnny  make haste away: Let there be now no more delaying, why shou d me still remain apart, Where e're I wander, I fancy this saying, her Death doth now lye so near my heart. Thou in thy life-time didst dearly adore me, as by thy sorrow I well m ght see, Tho' thou art gone hence a little before me, Love, i'le lye down in the Grave with thee: Farewel my Friends and each Relation, here with the World and you i'le pa t, For I shall be in a far better station when I m with  Nelly  my own dear heart.