Englands honour, and Londons glory. With the manner of proclaiming  Charles  the second King of  England,   this eight of  May,  1660.  by the honourable the two houses of Parliament, Lord Generall  Monk,  the Lord Mayor, Aldermen, and Common-Counsell of the City. The tune is,  Vi vel a Roy. CR DIEV ET MON DROIT HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE royal blazon or coat of arms COme hither Friends and listen unto me, and hear what shall now related be, For joy and comfort is now come to yea, and happy dayes in  England  you'l sée: The King and Parliament now are agréed, to ease our sadnesse, with joy and gladnesse, And for to frée us from all our annoy as by the Parliament now is decréed, then let us sing boyes, God save the King boyes, Drink a good health and sing Vi vel a Roy. The first of  May  to our great comfort, by our good King a Message was sent, the which ye Parliament receiv'd with concord and sent abroad the Land to content. For so Lords and Commons together agréed with their frée consent, and being well bent, For they will suffer none us to destroy, the which doth both our joy & comfort bréed. then let, &c: The eight of  May  as my muse doth here sing, Royall King  Charles  with a full consent Was then proclaimed  Englands  fair King. by Lords and Commons of Parliament. And by the heavenly powers divine, and in  Londons  Citty The cause of this Ditty Vnto all this Nation now tel of this joy the which unto the same did incline. then let, &c. The two houses in the Pallace Yard General  Monk  himselfe being by, Proclaimed the King with great regard, their acclamation reached the skye, From thence they marched along the  Strand, Vnto Temple-barr, whereas they met there The Citizens all with exceeding joy. they generally without command Cry'd God save the King boyes, the Earth did ring boyes, they cast up their hats and cry'd Vi vel a Roy. The Lord Mayor and Aldermen in velvet gowns, and over their heads their hats they did wave, Not caring at all the spending their Crowns rejoycing that  Charls  his birth-right should have The City Horse and their trained Bands this tryumph did grace, each man in his place, Did shout for the good wée now shall enjoy, the people shouted and clapt their hands, Crying God save the King, &c. Through fair  London  City we wel understand ye loud sounding trumpets ye sam did proclaim The like Eccho never hath bin in this Land then let these thrée Nations rejoyce for ye same, And all good people that in them remain All men did rejoyce with heart and with voyce Which all our sorrow at once did destroy for joy that  Charles  his right he shall gain. then let us sing boyes God save the King boyes Drink a good health and cry Vi vel a Roy. The Bells in the City did answer them then, such gallant musick hath seldome bin heard, The Trumpets returned their Ccco again, no heart from rejoycing at that time was har'd, For the greatest number were all of one mind, at every stand, the Mayor did command The founding trumpets to proclaim the joy, the City in this great comfort did find, then let, &c. The City so high'y did prize the same, and for to shew their ardent desire, The City séemed all in a flame, the which thousands then did admire, Such vast charges men did then bestow, the truth for to tell, the City did excell, So great was their expressions of their joy, no greater Ioy could be here below. then let, &c. The Lords and Commons likewise were glad, to sée the people so soon to comply, Many were reviv'd that were sad, for there were none that to joyn did deny. This glorious sight was most tryumphant, so great wa  the noyse expressing their joyes, And the peoples hearts were fil'd with such joy, not one was heard to make any complaint. then let, &c. Many brave Gallents are gon to the King to bear such a present as never was sent Heretofore, and wée hope they him will bring for to be crowned by this Parliament: Chéer up fair  England  rejoyce and be glad, the rights they'l restore, as was here-to-fore, And all offences they quite will destroy, and no one shall then have cause to be sad, then let, &c. This famous City great  Jove  defend them, their grave Messengers from them are gone, Vnto the King for to recommend them unto him the Citizens every one, Heaven blesse those Messengers that faithfull be, trust is reposed, their minds inclos d For his Subjects welfare is all his joy, by his Declaration at large you sée. then let, &c. And now to conclude the eight of  May, caused all  English- men loud for to sing, It was a joyfull and happy day. Bon-fires did burn and the Bells did ring, Then let us praise our great God above, he hath brought to passe, the like never was, Such great acclamations of excéeding joy, by fame performed and the God of love. then let us sing boyes, God save the King boyes, Cast up your Caps and cry Vi vel a Roy. I. W. FINIS,