The Young Farmer's Answer TO HIS SWEET-HEART  NANNY. VVHO Much complained of her undergoing the weary Burthen of a Troublesome Maiden-head. To the Tune of  The Scotch Hay-makers.     WHat's this my dearest  Nanny,  that fain would be a bride, And Frank is pitcht upon to lye by Nannys side: In tenth my Love with thee, I do presently agree, That thou art know  in years full grown, a bedfellow to be: Wherefore then should thy Mother deny, That thou art old enough with a Bedfellow to lye. Come Nanny, never fear, I'll rid thee of that care, For the burden of thy Maiden-head no longer thou shalt bear. Nere mind thy mothers prating against a married life, For she her self when single was mad to be a Wife, Because that she was barred, till Nineteen ere she Married, Yet e'ry day, I dare to say, she thought a year she tarried; Though now my Nanny she does advise To live a single life if she means for to be wise: Yet Nanny never fear, I'll rid thee of that care, For the burden of thy Maiden-head no longer thou shalt bear. But now thy only Mother does give her free Consent, That you as length should Marry unto your hearts content: Then Nanny take the minute, while thy mothers Humour's in it, Least like the wind she change her mind, and then she be agen it. Come then dear Nanny and go to bed, I burn like Cole of Fire for want of being wed: Therefore you need not fear, I'll rid thee of that care, For the burden of thy Maiden-head no longer thou shalt bear NANNY'S Reply. But Francis, what if troubles should fall upon our head, When we come to House-keeping after that we are wed: Let it be well or ill, I'm resolv'd to have my will, And to morrow my Frank I'll be thine, For we will go to church and be wedded all betime. So Maiden-head adieu, no more I'll think of you, But other pleasure out of measure, which I have to do. But my dearest Francis one question I must crave, The first night I am Married my Maiden-head to save; 'Tis a vow I lately tane, yet I value not the same; I'll leave't to you, what are you do, for you are not to blame, Come then let's to the Parson away, For this I do design shall be our wedding day. So Maiden-head adieu, no more I'll think of you. But in the night much more delight there is I have to do. Frank Then Nanny here's my hand, and to Church I'll straight with thee And VVilliam and brisk Iohnny they shall your bride-men be, There's Katherine and sweet Betty, who both are likewise pritty, VVill dance & sing, at night will fling the Stocking for to hit ye, But why do I talk of such sport as this, VVhen I shall with them-farther that Nanny I may kiss, Oh then my dear delight, I'll hug thee all the night, And the burden of thy Maiden-head Girl soon shall take its flight With that brisk  Nanny  smiled, and turn'd her head aside, For blushes, like to Roses, appeared in the bride: but the morning drawing on then to church went e'ery one, Since twas a fancy that dear  Nancy  should not lye alone: And when the Parson had done the trick, The bride-men were for Garters, and likewise for a lick; And wisht her ioy good store, that she might never more Complain o'th burden, heavy burden as she did before. VVhen Dinner it was over, and wine it went about, VVith musick and with dancing there was a heavy rout: but when the day was spent to each Guesses hearts content, About ten at night, with much delight to bed the Couple went, VVhere they were lost for to ease the Pain. Of a burden, which young  Nanny  did oftentimes complain, but in the dead o'th  night, to Nannys hearts delight, This burden of a Maiden-head from  Nanny  took its flight.