THE Young Mans Counsellour, OR, The most deserved praise of those sweet Complexioned Damosels of the Black and Brown. The pleasant Blacks and modest Browns, their loving Husbands please; Now if I had ten thousand pounds, I'd marry one of these. Tune of  All Trades. Licensed according to Order.   ALl thoughts of confusion forbear; there's none but meer Niseys that frets, And cast away Sorrow and Care, which never was known to pay Debts: And if you a Wooing will goe, and would with a good Wife be Blest. Come hither, and here I will show what Colour is counted the best. As for the Black and the Brown, they are the cream of the Town; For loe, here behold, they never can scold, not give you so much as a Frown. Beware of a Lass that's too kind, whose Visage is Swarthy and Pale; For most of that sort you will find are subject to play with their Tale, And count it a very small Crime to dally with every Mate; Then Young-men take warning in time, for fear you repent it too late: But as for the Black, &c. Now she that is freckl'd and fair, she'll baffle thy money in pride; Black Patches and powdered Hair, nay, wanton and lazy beside; She'll plunder and pillage thy Purse; all this by experience I know, Whoever is plagu'd with this Curse, he needs no more sorrow I trow. But as for the Black and the Brown, they are the cream of the Town; For loe, here behold, &c. Beware of thin Lips, and sharp Nose, whose Hair is the colour of Gold; If ever you marry with those, you're fitted I faith with a Scold. Whenever she wants of her will then down flows her Crockadiles Tears; But when her Top Tippit is up, she'll Ring you a Peal in your Ears; But as for the Black, and the Brown, they are the cream of the Town; For loe, here behold, they never can scold, nor give you so much as a frown. Now as for the Locks which are Gray, such Women are both old and tuff; They'll hold a brisk youngster in play, and think they have never enough; For if with a Damosel you jest, and tho' but in innocent mirth. Streight jealousie Reigns in her Breast: now this is a Hell upon Earth. But as for the Black, &c. The Flaxen hath no good Report, tho' many may fancy the same; I know that most of that sort, are notable Girls of the Game: They'll Gossip and Iunket about; nay, tipple Wine, Brandy and Beer, Spend more in a day without doubt, then ever they earn in a year. But as for the Black, &c. The Sandy and Swarthy I'll swear, she has the good name of a Slut; And you must take very good Care, or else she will poyson your Gut: Her Beauty will never forsake you; you may have it always in sight; There's no man a Cuckold will make you, except he does do it for spight; But as for the Black, &c. The Yellow is none of the best, they are for Contention and Strife; That poor man is happily blest, that hath such a one to his Wife. At night when he comes to his home, she'll call him both Cuckold and Fool, And proffer his Noddle to comb sometimes with a three legged Stool: But as for the Black, &c. The Foggy I'd have you forbear, I'd never chuse such for a Bride, If there was no other, I'll swear, in all the whole Nation beside. In Bed she'll near please thee that's flat, for there she lies all of a heap; And she that is Foggy and Fat, is subject to fart in her sleep. ut as for the Black, &c. The Carrots I'd like to forgot, which is the worst colour of all; If such a one fall to thy Lot, thy Blessing and comfort is small. All Blessings will bid thee farewell, the very first night you are Wed, Her Carrots will cast such a smell, you'll never endure her in Bed. But as for the Black, &c. You Young-men that hear me this day, and would with a loving Wife speed, Remember this Counsel I pray, and then you're happy indeed: If you mean to marry with any, pray buy this New Song, without doubt, You'll find it to be the best Penny that e'er you was known to lay out. As for the Black and the Brown, they are the cream of the Town; For loe, here behold, they never can scold, nor give you so much as a frown.