THE ENTERTAINMENT OF THE LADY MONK At FISHERS-FOLLY. Together with an Addresse made to her by a Member of the Colledge of Bedlam at her visiting those Phanatiques. The Bedlams Speech. TOpsie tervie, hai down derry. You sober boyes lets now be merry, Here comes noble  Georges  Wife, Let's then bespeak her to the life. Most Noble Lady, now we see The World turns round as well as we; Our Chains are Ornaments, our Cells Are Palaces where Honour dwells, Whilst you adorn this place, we know No greater happinesse below, Than to behold the sweet delight of him that will restore our right: Madam, to you it is we look As the best Scripture in our Book, Could we but learn to be so wise As love our Head as well as Eyes; Our  niversity might be Happy in your felicity, Our Chains as uselesse as the large Contents of  Lamberts  n -discharge, Our Time not spent in picking straws, Our Holds, only most wholesome Laws Our Bedlam true Phanatiques keep, Not such as dream when fast a sleep. Let  George  know we are not so mad, But we can love an honest Lad. The Speech at Fishers-Folly. THrice welcome noble Lady to this place, Wife to a Person sprung of royall Race; Whose High-born Soul proclaimes him one of those Which claime an Intrest in the Milkie Rose, Upon whose Brow prudence and valour try Mastries, and strive each other to out-vie: And what's his greatest praise, his Royalty Appears full fraught with ancient Loyalty. The rarest Jewels that the World imparts Are Royall Subjects crown'd with loyall Hearts, And such (sweet Lady) is your royall Spouse, Who cannot choose but mind his former Vowes, One that is verst in honest Politicks, And deeply hateth such Ped   icks. As Murder, Rapine, Perjury, which crimes Were in vile  Cromwels  and the Rumpers times Accounted Godliness, and in wrong Sence Stil'd Acts of Heavens Gracious Providence. But now (i hope) we shall be free'd from th'Spell And witching Charms o'th Devill and Machiavel, They must invent new Sleights, a cloak that's stronger, Religion will vayle vilany no longer; All men have now found their false knavery out, But noble  George  hath put them to the Rout: As  Fabius  wearyed  Hanibal,  he so Blasted their force, yet gave them nev'r a blow: Wonderfull Conqueror that could withstand, Nay soyle his Enemy without a hand! Never had  England  a more prosprous fate, Nor purchast freedome at a cheaper rate. Who absent, lo, we Pay all Honour due To her who is a Part of him; that's you, Ev'n you (fair Lady) who are ever blest In his Injoyment: Y'are a welcome Guest Unto our Board, whose presence makes us Jolly, Since you vouch safe to come to Fishers-Folly, So called from the Founder, a Lack-wit Who built the House, but could not finish it: Our  Geogre  a greater Work hath well begun, And scorns to leave it, till its throughly done: He gently does his businesse, and hath learn'd To move the Wheele, so that its not discern'd. And with a silent calmnesle doth asswage The Hot-spur spirits and the fiery rage Of fierce Phanantiques; who, like foolish Elves, By their mad zeal would have burnt up themselves, Thus hath he wisely stopt the mouths of those Builders of  Babel,  which did still oppose Th  repayring of our Sion, to whose ayd Wee'l all stand up untill the top-stone's layd: And after all, confesse Great  George  to be the chief Restorer o    Liberty: And you thric   happy   vourite of Fate Who have so wise so great, so good a Mate.