THE YOUNG-MANS VICTORY Over the POVVER of the DEVIL. Or, Strange and VVonderful News from the City of  LONDON ;   Being a full and true Relation of a Vertuous Young-Man, who being but Fifteen years of Age, living in the Parish of St.  Giles's,  was wonderfully tempted by the Devil: Discovering the Baits of the Devil, and how he followed him from place to place, wheresoever he did go, still tempting to leave his School, and to fly from Godliness, and to follow him, and he would furnish him with Baggs of Gold and Silver, promsing to show him all the Pleasures and Happiness that this World could afford, if he would but agree to follow his ways and take his Counsell. But this Youth having a stedfast Faith in Christ, made the Devil this. Answer:  Be gone from me thou wicked and infernal Spirit, and tempt me no more, for I am sure I shall enjoy all the Pleasures and Felicties that Heaven can afford, amongst all the Angels and Saints in Christ; therefore be gone from me thou wicked Deluder of poor Souls: I value not thy Bags of Gold and Silver, nor all the Pleasures thou canst give me in this World, when thou, Like a false deluding Serpent, wouldst have me to burn in Hell flames with thee.  Where upon the Youth immediately fell down upon his Knees, praving to Almighty God, that he might be able to overcome the Wiles and Temptations of the subtile Deceiver. The Subtile Tempter fitteth his Temptations, To the Degrees of  Ages  Inclinations. 1. The State of Chiildhood he Allures with Play, To cast both Book and Learning quite away. 2. When Youth arrive unto a Manly Stature, He baits his Hook after another Nature: Women, Wine, Musick, are the charms he finds From Virtues Studies to attack their minds 3. When Future State Man cast His thoughts upon, And towards  Heaven  would be jogging on, Satan  before him  Worldly Treasures  throw, To make the  Heaven -bound Pilgrim move more flow. 4. But if this fail, another cause he'll try, And lets his unrelenting Flames to fly Stand fast by Faith left thou be over thrown, The persevering Christian gains the Crown. The School-master and Schollar. The Vertuous Student The Holy Pilgrim travelling to the New  Jerusalem. The Christian armed against SATAN. N  now   Way, and straight is the Gate, that leadeth unto Life. Satan tempteth him to neglect Learning; and follow Gaming SATAN tempteth him from his Study to evil company. Satan tempteth him with Bag of Gold and Silver. Satan would tear him, but he is bound by Hell-flames. Satan. WHither away young man? speak, let me know: That thee and I may like Companions go, Walk not so fast, but keep thou pace with me, And I'll conduct thee to Felicity. Young man. My meaning is to thee I plainly tell To shun those Crooked paths that lead to Hell: For I desire to come to Heaven at last And that's the reason why I go so fast. Sa. Pish, talk no more of that, but tell me why Thou seemst not glad of my good Company? Come, if thou canst but take delight in me I shall be pleas'd with thy good Company. Y. But I'm a fraid that thou wilt me intice To fly from Virtue and to follow Vice, Which may my poor immortal Soul insnare Of which I ought to take a special care; Sa. Slight not my kindness for I do protest I'll thee conduct to everlasting rest; What canst then mere desire, or ask of me? I'll be thy Guide to blest Eternity. Y. What thou pretends so, should I believe I fear at last thou wouldst my Soul deceive, For those who do most kindness pretend Do often prove deceitful in the end. Sa. Be not so rash my Youth, but grave and wise With Reason and Discretion still advice, Believe my words and do not think I jest When as I say my foot-paths are the best; Do not mistake me, for 'tis I alone Can make thee happy, (youth) and there is none Can more advantage thee, they are but stories That they then hearknest too, call endless Glories. I say believe me, for I can display Truths figures, better by a deal than they; It lies within my power to deal with you As I my self shall think most fit todo: T'is I can make the Rich, or make the Poor And send such pains thou canst not well indure: Or I can Crown thee with such joys that thou Shalt hug my Charms, what faist thou to me now? Y. Tempter give o'er, thy crafty Wiles forbear Such frothy promises cannot insnare, Nor win me to thy false deluding will; With what thou seem'st to Cure, thou mean'st to kill: build my Faith on a foundation sure Firm as a Rock, and ever will endure. Sa. What! dost thou count me a Perfidious wretch That seek by crasty wiles thy Soul to catch? Alas! what profit can it be to me By wronging such a silly youth as thee. These empty thoughts, me thinks must needs presage And show the weakness of thy tender age: Thy time and breath thou idly hast mispent And for the same be sorry and Repent. Y. Oh happy word that thou hast now exprest, Repentance is the High-way to be Blest; Deceitful Wretch begone, I cannot brook Thy Golden Baits, nor yet thy Silver Hook: Tho' thou pretendest to be good and wise, I fear thou art the father of all lyes, Come for to try if thou canst me deceive As thou in  Paradice  betrayedst  Eve. S. Well, if thou wilt not my perswasions mind, Twill be your loss you in the end will find, For my part, I   so indifferent, That losing thee I shall not much repent; Take my instructions once I say again, Lest of thy folly thou too late complain: Say: shall I call thee mine, that thou mayst be For ever blest with immortality? Y. 'Tis not thy charming tongue that can prevail Over my armed  oul thou dost assaile; Gods Holy Word I'll strive for to fulfil, And his Commands shall be my Byass still; T'is not thy promises that I believe, Nor painted joys wherewith thou wouldst deceive; 'Tis not the Venome of thy Poysoned Dart Can hurt or penetrate my tender heart, Religion is my Buckler and my Shield, It lies not in thy power to make me yield, The Paths are streight in which I ought to run, Some use the broad ways till they are undone, And those that Virtue leave to follow Vice, Themselves bereave of Blessed  Paradice. S. Plead not Religion, for I dare maintain That what thou seekest for is all in vain; And let me tell you, 'tis not right nor just For to condemn me e're you try or trust; Observe my Actions, mind but my design, And in the end the profit will be thine; Why to each other should we be so strange? Be rul'd by me, we hearts will interchange. Y. Thou sayst that thou art good, but if thou be, Why dost thou strive thus to intangle me? My Conscience bids me tell thee (when thou cryest Thou'rt great, and good, and real) that thou lyest; If thou wert so, why dost thou strive to bring Me to destructive, poor and helpless thing? What Charity can seem in thee to shine, Or lodge within a Breast so curst as thine? Heavens help I will implore, then shall I be From thee and all thy Stratagems most free. Lord let him not conjure me by his Charms, Whose courtefies are nothing less thaa harms, Do thou protect me, I shall be secure From his fierce on-sets that would me allure, Give me thy Grace, then shall I happy be, And o're Temptation get the Victory. S. What, still deny! will notihng thee engage For to escape the fury of my rage; Thou'lt pull upon thee horrour and distress, Till thou cryest out that thou art pittiless, And none shall come to ease thee of thy grief, Nor shall thy mourning yield to thee relief, I will aflict thee with such Judgments sore, That thou in vain my pitty shall implore. Y. What tho' the Spring-Tide of thy fierce desire; Flow to the height, yet still my heart aspires To Blessed Glory, where th  Angels sings, Great  Hallelujahs  to the King of Kings: Thou Soul-deceiver my heart yields no place But (no ke) I scorn thee to thy race; Thy well-Dy'd Coloars, which thy Art prepares, Thy impudence sufficiently declares; Now batter on, for I do fear thee nor, My armed Soul doth fear no Cannon-shot. S. If thou dost move my anger, thou wilt find What 'tis to move a Friend that would be kind: Haves not sought thee both by night and day To go to bliss? Y. The quite contrary way. S.  Have I not promis'd all hears can desire To save thy Soul? Y. No, no, thou art a Lyar S.  Did I not promise to thee to be just? Y. But who is so mad in thee to put their trust S.  Did I not promise that thou shouldst be wise? Y. Through grace I did thy promises despise. S.  Did I not promise to increase thy store? Y  Thou art a Lyar, I replyed before. S.  Did I not promise thee Eternal bliss? Y. But who can give that which is none of his. S.  I by fair terms has labour'd tho' in vain? Y. That which I hope thou never wilt obtain. S.  But what if  I  should threaten thee with grief? Y. To Heaven I'd fly, and there should find relief. S.  Well then  I 'll leave thee since it is in vain To strive to get that which  I  would obtain, At my departure 'll give thee a Curse, Y. And if thou dost I shall be ne'er the worse: Satan  be gone, for it is in vain to think Whom Christ protects that thou canst cause to sink. S.  Why dost thou bid me go that fain would bless Thy Soul with everlasting Happiness? Come let's agree, and lend to me a smile, That never sought thy Soul for to beguile. Y. Thou art, and ever wert a great Deceiver, Striving to couquer e'ery Just Believer; And He will prove a Saviour at the last, Who through His Grace in Chains doth keep thee fast. S.  It is my kindness, and not thy desert, That makes me thus in Peace from thee to part; Think not that I did seek thy overthrow, I sought the good, tho' thou didst say me no, Y. I value not thy kindness, but desire That God would save me from Eternal Fire; So Satan now be gone, for I do trust, After this Life, to live among the just, Where thou wert once, but by thy cursed Pride, Eternal Misery did thee betide. FINIS.