A Worthy Kings Description. Both Country and City give ear to this ditty, Whilst that I the praises sing, And fame his honour out doth Ring, That best deserveth to wear the Crown; For Worth there's none can put him down And this is no flattering, to describe a worthy King; His Subjects here their desires explain, Desiring that he may enjoy his own again.   BRave news there is I understand, Brought by one that late did land, Many that heretofore were sad, Their hearts full merry are, and glad, And rejoice for his sake, That amends will us make, And will please us all as then, for he that we did lack is now returning back For to enjoy his own again. Fair  England  will be well content With the chief of men in government, When the Churches Champion smiles upon her, Earths Majesty and Natures honour; His foes unto him he will draw, Hee's the director of the Law. And the Nations Rights he will maintain: these things will appear before the next new year. When the King enjoys his own again. When the Scepter of mercy he doth hold, And true Iustice doth unfold, And when he doth his own imbrace, There you may see the glass of grace, And the terrour of Treason Which is but Reason. The poor mans Cause he will maintain; no man can this deny, hée's the life of  yalty, When that he enjoys, &c. His command if Right is without dispute, Then will his power be absolute: In him Wisdome is very rife, And his favour will lengthen life; His Subjects his charge will be, And his care for their safety. This pleasure will true peace maintain, which we shall prove his joy to be our love, When the King, &c. His wisdome is not to be paralel'd By all that e're the Scepter held, 'cause it is without all equallity, We hope no man can this deny: He is of great renown, And best deserves the Crown; For why he hat  most right to raign, thus saith the Trump of fame that he deserves the same, For to enjoy, &c. If for the same he be appointed, And he be call'd the Lords anointed; Like a King he must be served, Add be tenderly preserved: Then he the head must be Of the publick body: If that his right he doth regain, he will tender of us be if that we live to see Him to enjoy, &c. The Second Part, To the same Tune.   HE s a blessing over his people by plate, And Gods Vicegerent full of grace: He is no forreign Conqueror, But our Supream Governour, His safety his Councells cares, And his health his Subjects prayers: Whilst that on Earth he doth remain, his pleasure is his Peeres. that great  Jehovah  fears, And to enjoy his own again. And for to chear his Subjects sadnesse, His content will be their gladnesse, His presence must Reverenced be, According to his high degree; His person must not be scorned, But his civill Court adorned, When in fair  England  he doth raign, all men shall be free, and set at liberty, When the King, &c. What righfull thing by him is said, Ought not for to be disobey'd; One thing cannot be denied. That his wants must be supplyed, Nor his place unregarded, But Royally Rewarded, And richly his state maintain: then let our prayers be these happy days to see. That the King may enjoy, &c. Although a God he cannot be, Hee's more then an ordinary man we see, Wee do hope hee's so divine, That from the right hée'l not decline. Nor yet will he delay Gods laws to obey, And all mens Rights for to maintain, which suddenly will be, when that men do sée That the King, &c. I now crave pardon for this bold thing, For describing of a worthy King, And heartily for him will pray Vnto the Lord both night and day, And under Heaven him commend, That the Lord will him defend, That he in this Land long time may Raign, these blessings then will be who ever lives to see The King &c. Then shall  London  Conduits run with Wine, With melodious noise of Musick fine; Then Bells shall Ring, and Bone fires burn, For joy of his gracious return, From sorrow we Hope to be free, From Tyranny and slavish Pain, then let us all rejoyce both with heart and voice, When the King e joys his own again. FINIS.