Your humble Servant Madam. BEING  The flattering Courtier. OR,  The Cheating Lover; To a  ery fine Northern Tune.     I  Am a Blade That from an old Trade, Have taken out a new one Tis onely this, To Court and Kiss Swear Oaths and nere a true one I can tell an hundred lyes, And a thousand more devise, Never was the like  since   Adam, I can Fetter whom I please, With a Flattering disease, And your humble Servants Madame. The Warrs are done, And I must run A Course that may Pr  me Should I rely. On Honesty, It were the way to  me  I ha' giv'n away my  For a Perriwigg and Muff, And an Art no Wit can Fadom: I have got a Place at Court, Never paid a Penny for't, But your humble Servant Madame. Whilst a  Cavelier Both lean and  ear And almost like to Sta d   is A Ladies Letter, Shall be better Then all his Iron Service. When I found out what would doo't Straight I put a Lady too't, What things I lackt I had  , Nothing did  I  give for this, But a promise and a kiss, With your humble Servant Madam.   MY Courtiers Place, Doth give me grace, And Pimp unto my Trade is; The Devill and I, In Ambush lye To Catch all kind of Ladies; I can call 'um pritty Souls, ough they be  as  old as  Pouls, Then I a bonny Lad am;  the Women I Trappan Fetch 'um off and bring 'um on, With your humble Servant Madam. ome give me Rings, And better a Things, So cunning is my carriage, To every soul, Both fair and fowl I promise lawfull Marriage. I have got so many  Wives , If  I had as many Lives, I should be as old as  Adam. But before we go to Church, I'll  leave them in the lurch. With your humble Servant Madam. When I find a Face  Of a  stately  Grace, That would have all adore her, A Knight-hood I Get presently And that I spread before her: So  I may get somthing by't  I can quickly be a  knight ; If a Litle will perswade 'um I can tell um that they shall, Answer to no other call But your humble Servant Madam. If I  see  one that Is given to th tt, I praise her Ingenuity: When I take a Prize With  the black Eyes , I call her Queen of  Beauty If another merry be I can laugh as well  as  she When she  asks , I monstrous sad  am But if I find her in a b t, I can fit her for the  foot With your humble Servant Madam. All Passions I, Can  falsifie ,  my Trade is, I have of late Gain'd an  Estate My humouring of Ladies And I very well do find, What I  fit  them in their  kind For  I've   e u l d  Adam Woman first did ransom Man But I   them  agen . With your humble Servant Madam.