The most Renowned PRINCE RUPERT. Printed Exactly to the Author's Original. O That I could but Vote my self a Poet! Or had the Legislative knack to do it! Or like the Doctors Militant, could get Dub'd at adventure Verser Banneret! Or had I  Cacus  trick, to make my Rhimes Their own Antipodes, and track the Times. Faces about,  says the  Remonstrant  spirit; Allegiance is Malignant, Treason Merit: Huntington -colt, that pos'd the sage Recorder, Might be a Sturgeon now, and  pass by Order. Had I but—'s gift, (that splay-mouth'd brother) That declares one way, and yet means another: Could I but write asquint; then (Sir) long since, You had been sung,  A great and glorious Prince: I had observ'd the language of the days; Blasphem'd you, and then periwig'd the phrase With  Humble service,  and such other Fustian, Bells which ring backward in this great combustion: I had revil'd you, and without offence Te  Literal,  and  Equitable  sence Would make it good: when all fails that will do't, (Sure that Distinction cleft the Devils foot) This were my Dialect, would your Highness please To read me but with Hebrew Spectacles; Interpret counter, what is cross rehears'd: Libels are Commendations when revers'd. But you're inchanted, Sir, you're doubly free From the great Guns and Squibbing Poety; Whom neither  Bilbo  nor Invention pierces, Proof ev'n against th'Artillery of Verses. Strange! that the Muses cannot wound your Mail; If not their Art, yet let their Sex prevail. At that known Leaguer where the bonny  Besses Supply'd the Bowstrings with their twisted Tresses, Your Spells could ne'r have fenc'd you, ev'ry Arrow Had lanc'd your noble brest, and drunk the marrow: For Beauty, like white Powder, makes no noise; And yet the silent Hypocrite destroys, Then use those Nunns of  Helicon  with pity, Lest  Wh —tell his Gossips of the City, That you kill Women too, nay Maids, and such Their  General  want's  Militia  to touch. Impotent E—, is it not a shame Our Commonwealth, like to a  Turkish  Dame, Should have an  Eunuch  Guardian? May she be Ravish'd by  Charles,  rather then sav'd by thee. But why, my Muse, like a Green-sickness-Girl, Feedst thou on coals and dirt? a Gelding Earl Gives no more relish to thy female pallat, Than to that Ass did once the Thistle-sallat. Then quit that barren Theme, and all at once Thou and thy sisters, like bright  Amazons, Give  Rupert  an Alarum.  Rupert!  one Whose Name is Wit's Superfoetation: Makes Fancy, like Eternity's round womb, Unite all Valour, present, past, to come, He, who the old Philos ohy controuls, That voted down plurality of souls: He breaths a Grand Committee; all that were The wonders of their Age, constellate here. And as the elder Sister Grow  and Sence (Souls paramount themselves) in Man commence But faculty of Reasons Queen, no more Are they to him, who were compleat before, Ingredients of his Vertue. Thread the Beads of  Caesar 's acts, great  Pompey 's, and the  Swede 's: And 'tis a Bracelet fit for  Rupert 's hand, By which that vast Triumvirate is span'd. Here, here is Palmistry; here you may read How long the world shall live, and when't shall bleed! Whatever Man windes up, that  Rupert  hath; For Nature rais'd him on the Publike faith; Pandora 's brother, to make up whose store, The gods were fain to run upon the score. Such was the Painters  Brieve  for  Venus 's face, Item,  an eye from  Jane,  a lip from  Grace. Let  Isaac  and his Citts slay off the plate That tips their Antlers for the Calf of State; Let the zeal-twanging nose that wants a ridge, Snuffling devoutly, drop his silver bridge: Yes, and the Gossip-spoon augment the sum, Although poor  Caleb  lose his Christendom: Rupert  outweighs that in his Sterling self, Which their self-want pays in commuting pelf, Pardon, great Sir; for that ignoble Crew Gains, when made Bankrupt in the Scales with you. As he who in his Character of Light Stil'd it  God 's  shadow,  made it far more bright By an Eclipse so glorious; light being dim, And a dead nothing, when compar'd to him: So 'tis Illustrious to be  Rupert 's foil, And a just Trophy to be made his spoil. I'll pin my faith on the  Diurnal 's sleeve Hereafter, and the  Guild-Hall -Creed believe; The Conquests which the Common Council hears With their wide-listening mouth from greatest Peers That ran away in triumph: such a foe Can make them Victors in their overthrow, Where Providence and Valour meet in one, Courage so pois'd with Circumspection, That he revives the quarrel once again, Of the Souls throne, whether in Heart or Brain; And leaves it a drawn Match: whose fervor can Hatch him, whom Nature poach'd but half a man, His Trumpet, like the Angel's at the last, Makes the soul rise by a miraculous blast. 'Twas the mount  Atho  carv'd i'th' shape of Man, (As 'twas defin'd by th'  Macedonian ) Whose right hand should a populous Land contain; The left should be a Chanel to the Main: His Spirit might inform th'amphibious figure, Yet strait-lac'd sweats for a Dominion bigger: The terrour of whose Name can out of seven (Like  Falstaff 's Buckram men) make flie eleven, Thus some grow rich by breaking: Vipers thus, By being slain, are made more numerous. No wonder they'll confess no loss of men; For  Rupert  knocks 'em, till they gig agen. They fear the Giblets of his Train; they fear Even his Dog, that four-legg'd  Cavalier. He that devours the scraps which  Lunsford  makes, Whose Picture feeds upon a childe in Steaks: Who, name but  Charles,  he comes aloft for Him, But holds up his Malignant leg at  Pym: 'Gainst whom th'ave several Articles in Souse, First, that he barks against the sense o'th'House; Resolv'd Delinquent,  to the Tower straight; Either to th'Lions, or the Bishops grate: Next, for his Ceremonious wag o'th'tail; But there the Sisterhood will be his Bail; At least the Countess will, Lusts  Amsterdam, That lets in all Religions of the Game. Thirdly, he smells Intelligence, that's better, And cheaper too, then  Pym 's from his own Letter, Who's doubly paid (Fortune, or We the blinder?) For making Plots, and then for Fox the finder. Lastly, he is a Devil, without doubt; For when he would lie down, he wheels about; Makes Circles, and is couchant in a Ring: And therefore score up one for Conjuring. What canst thou say, thou wretch? O quarter, quarter! I'm but an Instrument, a meer Sir  Arthur: If I must hang, O let not our fates vary, Whose office 'tis alike to fetch and carry. No hopes of a Reprieve; the mutinous stir That strung the Jesuite, will dispatch a Cur. Were I a devil, as the Rebel fears, I see the House would try me by my Peers. There  Jowler,  there! ah  Jowler!  'st, 'tis nought; Whatere th'accusers cry, they're at a fault: And  Glyn  and  Maynard  have no more to say, Then when the glorious  Strafford  stood at Bay. Thus Labels but annext to him, we see Enjoy a Copie-hold of Victory. St.  Peter 's shadow heal'd;  Rupert  is such, 'Twould finde St.  Peter  work, yet wound as much; He gags their Guns, defeats their dire intent; The Cannons do but lisp and complement. Sure  Jove  descended in a Leaden shower To get this  Perseus,  hence the fatal power Of Shot is strangled: Bullets thus ally'd, Fear to commit an act of Parricide. Go on, brave Prince, and make the world confess Thou art the greater world, and that the less: Scatter th' accumulative King, untruss That fivefold Fiend, the States  Smectymnuus; Who place Religion in their Vellam-ears, As in their Phylacters the Jews did theirs. England 's a Paradise, (and a modest word) Since guarded by a Cherubs flaming sword. Your Name can scare an Atheist to his Prayers, And cure the Chin-cough better then the Bears: Old  Sibyl  charms the Tooth-ach with you: Nurse Makes you still children; and the pond'rous Curse The Clowns salute with, is deriv'd from you, ( Now  Rupert  take thee, Rogue, how dost thou do? ) In fine, the Name of  Rupert  thunders so, K— 's but a rumbling Wheel-barrow. FINIS.