The Zealous Lover. He strives for to illustrate her Perfection who now hath brought him under Loves subjection, No task so hard he will undergoe if that she will but Love unto him show What ever can be had, shall be her own if she will yield to fancy him alone. To the Tune of,  Underneath the Green wood Tree, &c.     COme prethy Love let me prepare, my zealous affection to declare, And set forth thy admired parts, which captivates so many hearts, T ou art the Phenix of our days, and shall for beauty bear the praise. Then prethee fairest fancy me, and let me not languish in misery. Thy pretty rolling sparkling eyes of my poor heart hath made a prize, Thy Che ry Chéeks & dimpled Chin affection from all hearts do win: Thy hair like Amber doth appear or t r ads of Gold which shine so clear, Th n prethee dearest,  &c. Each smile that doth proceed from thee, debars me of my liberty, Since every word that thou canst say might lead a thousand hearts astray. Thy beauty in each part doth shine where all the Graces do combine, Then prethy fairest,  &c. When first I did thy face admire, my sences all were set on fire: My heart with Love was sore inflam'd, when as I heard thee once but nam'd; No happiness on Earth could be like to enjoy a kiss from thée, Then prethee,  &c.   I'le Crown thy joyes with hearts content, if thou to love me wilt consent And all delights that ere can be, shall dayly wait and tend on thée. Thou shalt have pleasures at command; and servants ready at thy hand: Then prethee fairest fancy me and let me not languish in misery. No Lady that in Court doth dwell, in rich attire shall thée excel For Silks & Satins fine and brave and costly jewels thou shalt have; All sorts of Musick thou shalt hear sweet pleasures harmony to the ear Then prethy fairest fancy  &c. All in a pleasant shady Grove, we'l walk to recreate my Love, And sit down by a Chrystal Spring whilst pretty birds do chirp and sing, With hand in hand we'l passe the time in Summer when flowers are in the prime, Then prethee,  &c. I'l range throughout the world so wide for Pearls of price to please my Bride And what new fashions may be had. ile bring thee home to make thee glad, Thou shalt be like the  Indian  Queen so rich and costly to be seen. Then, Why should thy Maiden-head do thee wrong by keeping of the same too long Since that by marriage thou wilt be compleat and live most happily. Who dies a maid (tis spoke right well) must ever expect to lead Apes in Hell, Then,  &c. If little Cupid bend his Bow, twill be in vain to resist you know The god of Love will angry be if you despise his Deity: It were far better for to yield and sport your time in  Venus  field. Then  &c. There is no joyes in single life compared to a married wife, Where Pleasures all compleated are beyond your expectation far: What heart can wish may there be had to make a loving couple glad. Then prethee,  &c. Therefore my dear be not afraid to change the title of a maid But let me hear your answer kind to satisfie your longing mind With open arms il'e thée embrace, when we encounter face to face Then prethee fairest fancy me and let me not languish in misery.