UNDER GOD; Humbly Desiring His BLESSING to this Famous and Wonderful Never-failing CORDIAL DRINK OF THE WORLD, The Great PRESERVER of Mankind. A SECRET Far Beyond any Thing YET KNOWN TO THE WORLD. Never Published by any but by me  Thomas Hinde  G. in  London,  Most Approved and Admirable for its EXCELLENT VERTUES AND USES. To be satisfied of the Truth, Pray Read this PREFACE. This is to give notice to all Persons, That they may not be deceived by the bold and injurious abuses of several Pretenders, started up of late, (since the publishing of my Bills) which doth now most falsly lay claim to the Practice of this my Never-Failing-Cordial: and to prevent further fraud of these several Counterfeits; I have with full power ordered and confirmed my Eldest Brother Mr.  John Hinde  to be my successor, and the faithful true preparer of my Cordial as my own self; and to dispose and put to sale my Cordial as he shall approve and see fit, (and for the general Benefit of all) he doth sell it at his own house, as at the end of my Bills will fully direct you, and the Price of each Bottle; (And is sold no where else in  YORK.)    And that you may know (that I  Thomas Hinde  am the true Author) I would fain know of these three New Upstarts, [If they would be the true Authors] where were they, their Books or Bills of the  GOUT,  and other Distempers, before I Published mine? * But that they cannot produce, &c. Therefore, I have, for prevention of all Pretenders and Counterfeits, set my Seal on my Bottles, being the Wounded Hinde with  T. H.  incompassed in a Lawrel, that none may be Deceived by taking the Wounded Hinde with  S. W.  incompassed in a Lawrel, (which I declare to be none of mine) but a New Upstart, as the other Pretenders mentioned in my Directions: Therefore look well to the Seal on my Bottles; for the Counterfeiting of it is daily Attempted to the Displeasure of many that has been Deceived, and brought into great danger thereby. And though my Bills and Directions are now Counterfeited, and set forth in Books and Bills to Deceive the People; yet notwithstanding, if they have it at my trusty Friend Mr.  John Hindes  House, they * cannot be deceived. But of late one boldly takes upon him to make use of my Cures in the words of my Bills and Directions, and sets them forth in his own Name, and wilely under the Notion of the People, and injurious abuse of my Name, so disgorge inveterately his designed malice, spight and envy, with close and great deceit against my successful Proceedings, and great Cures attested by the People, and not only so, but willfully inventeth what he will, and useth endeavors to defame me too, and this to draw his purpose about, by amusing the People, to bring a reputation on his Liquor, by maligning of my Never Failing-Cordial, which is above the Malice of a Libeller, where I am known, and where I am not, let my Cordial plead for it self and me, — against such known new Upstarts, that would, if possible, Assume the Body of the Dead. **  As for his near driven shift, with hardy Brazen Brow, to say most impudently that he taught me, and that my Cordial which I sold in the Country, I bought it of him, &c.  (   can be proved notorious false) for it is impossible that such an Illiterate Fellow could teach that [which himself never knew] or sell me that, which he could never make, Or I to Justifie his false Transactions, that has filched the very words of my Cures out of my Bills and Directions, and falsly sets them down, as his (own)  &c.— and thus he has Posted himself as a Mark, that all that Runs may Read a Libeller (a Fellow of no Value) not worth the answering, for he finding his Forgeries not at all Credited, has bodly presumed to Print them with Allowance (which is since proved false to his face) so 'tis like he may hire Vouchers to Swear he is the Man right or wrong, as well as Impudence, to imploy such desperate Hectors of the Quill, as value not to Stab any mans Reputation for half a Crown. My laborious Travels in divers forraign Countries, and great pains above Twenty years is truly well known, and how curiously inquisitive I was in the great concernment of Health, as now effectually appeareth, &c. But these Jugling Impostors doth falaciously pretend, by setting forth a Book  alled  ELIXIR SALUTIS,  the choice Drink of Health, or Health-bringing Drink: )  under the color of my Cordial, * which was never heard or known of before, (till several Years after I published my Bills   now they do most Audaciously aver, to be the true Authors of my Cordial, (but it is all in vain) for the thing like the thing, is not the thing it self, to work the effect intended, &c. for my Cordial, through the Blessing   doth powerfully prevail to effect the Cures my Bills mention, * as doth daily appear by the Peoples experience;—therefore I shall not observe the barking of those that hireth others for gain, to say they are C  of such and such Distempers, &c. as some Mercenary persons, by their jugling Counterfeits, hath presumed by their subtilty to beguile many) THis Cordial is so agreeable to NATURE, that it performs all its Operations as Nature would have it, as if She had fitted to her Self, or found out Mediums to Reduce all her Extreams to an equall Temper;  It being fitted to all Humors, Ages, Complexions, Sexes, and Constitutions.  For if any Noxious Humor offend the Noble Parts,  This Great Preserver  will so Highly Fortifie Nature, that it will not admit any Enemy to enter; and he or she that keeps this Inestimable Jewel by them,  May bid farewel to former Ways they used,  and will save them that Great Expence of Charge. THis Great Preserver, or Never-Failing-Cordial doth Cure the GOUT, for it Stifles it in its  Birth,  as true Experience hath Found: Extracting out of all parts of the Body, those Crude and Viscous Humors, which are the Spawn and nourisher of it, and doth free the Joints of all other Diseases,  to Admiration. Dissolving the Stone and Gravel; a better REMEDY CANNOT BE, For when it's  Congealed, it brings away  the Sand and Gravel soft as  Butter or Fine Flower  under your Finger; and not only so, but doth destroy the Original Cause: It  Never faileth  to Cure the Gravel in the Reins and Kidneys Ulcerated, that sendeth forth water like Blood, and *  wonderfully  Cleanseth the Reins of all Foulness and Imperfections, and forceth Urine. It Restoreth all Languishing Natures, and  Melancholy drooping Spirits, Curing  the Hypocondriack Melancholy; and do  most Powerfully Oppose all Black and mixed Humors, as the Grand Enemy to Nature: for it is continually drawing them out of the Veins and Arteries into the Stomack, and from thence sendeth them away,  (after that)  Nature Rejoyceth. It pursueth the SURFEITS from place to place; and though the BODY be swelled up, in  two or three days time  it will raise them out of their Beds, and set them on their  Feet again:  It taketh away the Scurvy out of the Body Root and Branch; and the Dropsie to Admiration, and all other Distempers that  join with it.  This is an Excellent  Cordial  for those that dwells near the Sea-side, or goes long Voyages: neither Sun, nor Frost, can hurt it, for it will keep good several years. It taketh away the Head ach, Dizziness, and Swimming in the Head, or Megrim; Convulsion-Fits in the Head, Swooning away in their Night-Sleep,  Though Afflicted for many years. It helpeth bad Digestion, Pain, or any stoppage of the Stomach, and shortness of Breath: It Causeth a good Appetite, and Defendeth the Head  From all Vapors  which ascend from the Mother and Spleen; and is a  most certain Remedy against  the Cholick, or any griping of the Guts, and stayeth Vomiting. It taketh away all Pains from the Heart, and  Perfectly  Cureth those that are stopt with Flegm  as Choaked, and Stifled in their Sleep for want of Breath. It giveth Ease to Antient People of the Tissick, but  Cureth those  that are not too far gone. THis Harmless and Pleasant Cordial is so great a  Friend  to all Women kind, that they cannot have a Richer Jewel bestowed upon them, as Relating to their Health, than this;  That will not fail to Clear them  from Obstructions, sitting and inabling them for Conception, and after Delivery or Miscarriage, though in danger of Death, it is an effectual Remedy. It doth Cure The Green-Sickness of all sorts in a little time: * This is that which will  not Fail  but bring them to a Virgin-Blush, Upholding Nature in Her Strength and Vigor,  Making  the Visage well  Colored,  the Breath  Sweet,  the Body  Lusty. And those that doth Visit the Spaw for their Recreation in the Summer Season, let them be sure  to Prepare their Bodies  with this Cordial according to the Directions, and it will clear the passages, and carry off the Malignant Crudities. The like they must do when they go home, to clear their bodies of that which may be left behind. It doth free the Liver and Spleen of all  Obstructions,  and so by that means helpeth the Fits of the Mother and Spleen; It is good for Nurses which give Suck, for it will Cleanse their Blood, and Cause good and  Wholesome Milk;  It Cures the Rickets in Children, by opening the Obstruction, and many other Scurvy Diseases. It bursteth, and perfectly destroyeth Worms in those that are of Years, and almost over-gone with them, bringing away the skins of half a yard, and near a yard long,  As hath been Proved. It helpeth sore and Rheumy Eyes, it stays all Rheums that fall from the Head upon the  Lungs:  It perfectly easeth all Coughs, Colds, and Wheesings, and cures Consumptions if not far gone, and likewise the Yellow Jaundies. It keepeth a clear Passage between the Head and Heart, * and will  not Admit  of any Noxious Humors to annoy the Noble Parts: It will keep off those Frightful Fears and Griefs from their violent seizing on the Heart, enabling a  Weak Person  to make wonderful Resistance, by taking away the sharp Humors, which they may see  come away:  A Happy Riddance. It takes away the Extream Burnings in the bottomes of the Feet, and Palms of the Hands, which so sore Afflict the Heart: Those that are too hot, it cooleth; and in them that are too cold, it increaseth Heat and Strength, by taking  away the Cause,  as the Direction at large do shew. To Conclude, it highly Exalts the Generative Virtue, Restoreth Radical Moisture, *  Cleanseth and Strengthneth  the Vessels  in both Sexes. I need not Name Particulars. FOR, in a word, it's that which Stifles most Diseases in their Birth, or Kills them in their Strength, keeping all Sexes in their Pristine Health; who will Admire the Effects, and confess it to be a Rich Treasure in time of Need, which  will not fail them  (under God;) For it doth most *  wonderfully Purifie  the whole Body of Man, so that few Diseases, (Gods appointed time being not come) is able to withstand it: For most Distempe  are subject to its Innocent and wonderful Operation.  Did the World but know it,  * they would Highly Esteem it a  speedy Friend  to HEALTH, Truly deserving the due Praise of all Men. And (through the goodness of God) by long Travelling, I purchased with a great Sum this Pearl, and  Inestimable Iewel,  (as I did many) but this is the best that ever I heard of among them all. And through the Earnest Defire of MANY that have Importuned with me so far, for to Publish it, (though I need it not for Gain:) For I have a Competent Estate otherways to live on, without the Practice of this. But out of an Hearty Design of Promoting the Health and Common Good of All. Who may and would be helped, I have set forth this, to inform the wonderful Effects that have been wrought by this Cordial Spirit, and abundantly Testified at large by many, which this Bill cannot contain, to give all sorts of Persons full satisfaction of its Innocent and wonderful Operation in the whole Body of Man; but for brevity sake I have here omitted.   And (to satisfie the Curiosity of some) I do faithfully promise all Persons, That my Cordial is not made by any Chymical preparations; neither is it offensive to Nature, as some doth boldly affirm, to hold up their particular interest,  &c. —but this my Cordial  is so safe, and so truly prepared,  and does Taste so Pleasant, *  That the least Child may take it, Sick or Well,  Winter or Summer. I have inserted nothing but what my Cordial  will not fail to Cure,  AS EXPERIENCE HATH FOUND upon Men, Women, and Children, and doth find true to the End. And to prevent all doubts, that you may be certain and fully assured never to be deceived by any dangerous Counterfeits, I have with full power ordered and confirmed my Eldest Brother Mr.  John Hinde  to be my Successor, and the Faithful true preparer of my Cordial as my own self, and to dispose and put to sale my Cordial to whom he shall approve and see fit. For he was the very first that ever sold it, from the very first time that ever it was Made, for he and I only knew, &c. and after that, the jugling deceivers crept in. But to prevent the prejudice of many Poor Creatures languishing under grievous Distempers, that they may not be brought into great dangers by unknown cheating trash, as hath been affirmed to me by several Persons. And with prodigious impious impudence, doth not only Counterfeit my Bills and Directions in Print, but the Seal on my Bottles too, therefore to prevent the great deceit of such Notorious Counterfeits. * I do assure the World, that THOMAS HINDES Famous and Never-Failing-Cordial Faithfully prepared, is no where else to be had, but at Mr.  John Hindes  House on the Pavement, at the sign of the Hand and Pen, and no where else in  York,  at Six shillings the Pint Bottle, and Three shillings the half Pint Bottle. And if you have it at the abovesaid House, you cannot be mistaken, but may be assured it is right, and at all times shall have it as pure and good as out of my own hands. With Directions at large in Print for the Use of it, and for the Conveniency of all to save Charges,  and bid farewel to their former ways for ever.  A Happy Riddance, and a Blessed Remedy. Soli Deo Gloria.