MERC RI S  ACADEMICVS.  The tenth Weeke. MONDAY.  February  16. 1645. YOu have heard of Mr  Richard Browne,  a man so called, and but for Civility could not be so called, having forfeited his Gentility and Christianity, and exchanged both into Gentilisme, by an Act as horrid as the Divell could tempt him to, or himselfe consent to: That of the  Moors  comes short of it; they but laugh at the mischiefes they have done, to make themselves merry: but this man studies mischiefe, acts mischiefe  and glories in the act; yet he is a  Branch  sprung from that Root; a  Chip  hewen out of that  Blocke;  an  Englishman  (I blush at my Country) extracted from a  Moore;  listen to the Act, and abhorre the Actor: He was the cruell  Ga ler  of many Loyall Prisoners; not one but he hath used hardly enough, If burthens of  Irons, Beds  of  Stone,  and  halfe meales  of  Bread and Water,  be usage hard enough: we can name the men he hath so served, and some that by this usage he hath starved too; but all this may be borne: and therefore at last he hath outdone himselfe, by making his Tortures as neare to those of Hell, as possible:   For after he had by promise wooed one of his Prisoners to take the Covenant, and could not by that meanes winne him to his  Lure,  and make him as  ad as himselfe; he then frights him by  Want,  by  Blowes,  by  Bol  to swallow that  Rateb n ;  And the poore mans patience being overcome by these Extremities, he takes the  Covenant,  the  Covenant;  he had no sooner so done, which left s ing enough in his Conscience, but instantly saies Mr  Browne, so Sirrah, now you may goe for a forsworne Rogue, what I could not doe to your Body  I have done to your Soule: now Dye and  e D ed;  But soft  Richard,  this was no sinne of wilfulnesse, no sinne of malice, no sinne of scorne or contempt  and therefore may be forgiven upon his Repentance, your  Maister  may thanke you for acting his part so well; yet our Revenge is not so high, but that we wish you as much Repentance as this man in  Oxford  testifies, for committing so great a sinne i  Mr  Richard Browne  solicited him, scourged him to, in  Abingdon,  a little before he left his   Command there: and wherein Colonell  R borough  scotn'd to succeed him  least after-Ages should say  e   such a  Wood gers  Deputy, whose  e rt  was a   d  as   and a great deale werse: TUESDAY.  Feb.  17. Since whose departure three or foure of our  Oxford  Cavalty knockt at  Abingdon  doores, to know how they did; and neare  Cullam Bridge,  met with two Ca ts loaden  the one with Cheese, the other with Bread and Oats, driving with such provision to that Garrison: They seize upon both; but finding the Horses too weake to draw another  way as fast as their occasions required, they turn'd both Teems into one, wherewith they perswaded the  aines  to drive that Cart which was loaden with Mans-meat and Horse-meat into  Oxford;  And here you must take notice of the difference betwixt Loyall Subjects and Rebels: For they have no sooner unloaden, but they returne the Horses  and Cart to their owner,   which that man, who of late told you he did not use to sweare, would not have done upon his  Faith   which is not so much his  Oath,  as his  doll,  because it is  nothing,    nothing worth, being much a Kinne to the  Publique Faith,  which hath not yet repayed one  Do  of those   it stand  engaged for: which, how, or when those  Patriots  that love the  Common-wealth  so well, (and truly I beleeve they love it very well, if  wealth  have his true and proper signification) will discharge, you may guesse at by a    Command  issued from the  New High and mighty States of England,  to the  North,  perswading all men,  Malignants  and all, to stand upon their  Guard  against the  Scots:  which gives some probability, that the  German Prophecy  may outdoe Mr.  Lillyes,  when it is fulfilled in  Brittaine; What Association begun, Diff ciation will end. It hath commenced well in  Scotland;  For if you divide it into foure parts, you will find ( Montrosse  Maister of three,  The Perfect Occurrences,  Tuesday,  Feb.  10. in his 7th  N m    for the year  1646.  ells us,  The Parliament was sitting at St Andrewes, when the lust Letters c e from thence, but may be risen since   (you may speake it indicatively)  And that on Thursday last  (when was that Thursday last )  there was a generall day of Humiliation throughout all parts of Scotland, within the Parliaments power there   (it was well remembred)  it being set a part for a solemne First, for the acknowledging of the sinnes of the Nations before Almighty God, and begging pardon for the sa : and particularly for that so many of their Nation (so many,  pray mark it)  doe joyne with  and assist Montrosse in this Rebellion against the Church and People of God:  (No man;  They assist  Montrosse  and the Church and People of God against this Rebellion: ) but how soever we thanke you for so much truth. WEDNESDAY.  Feb.  18. And shall requite you with as sad a truth; our  Oxford  horse   yesterday returned safe home, having dispatcht the businesse they went for, and somewhat more: For meeting with a Party of Colonell  Pyle's  new raised Regiment, they took eight and twenty of their Horse, Armes, and men, and lodged them safe at  Faringdon;  where they had no sooner taken their leave, but they were  faced  by some hundreds of Rebels, who upon the taking of eight of their fellowes, prisoners, thought it their best course to  face  about, and so away: which eight waited upon our Horse to this City; and from one of them, wee received severall Letters of Intelligence: one of which,  Robert Gough  by name, seemes to give intelligence to the  Moderate Intelligencer;  For in one of his Letters he relates the whole businesse (but not the whole truth) of  Marleborough,  as he hath printed it,  Jan. 31. Num.  48. where he saies,  The Oxford Horse return'd with their Plunder, having lost a hundred Horse:  whereas the very truth is, (as we told you Thursday,  Jan.  22.) they lost but two Officers; no Common Souldiers: and as we are since informed, one Mr  Johnson  a Chi urgeon: and therefore we desire the  Moderate Intelligencer,  not to give too much Credence to this  Robert Gough:  who in another of his Letters dated at  Verulam   and directed to  London,  saies  Interminis; The Parliament would not grant a Treaty by Lords, and therefore the King sent againe that He would come to  London  himselfe, upon their  a e Conduct that He should returne againe to  Oxford,  if they could not agree, whereof the Parliament accepted, but would not consent He should come into  London,  but appointed  Zion house  for Him to come to, to which place they will send to Him: so they ordained a Committee to bethinke them how He should be entertained, and to bring the Parliaments resolutions to Him;  After this, with a great deale such stuffe he concludes, only altering the Scene from  Zion; The King came to St  Iame's  house last night for certaine, and all the Coaches in the City met Him two miles out—The Posts brought the Newes to  Newbury  even now to  Dalbier,  and another Post went to the Kings Garrison as  Dennington  with the same Newes; whereat the Ordinance   in both places answered one another.  I need not give any observations upon this Letter, but we shall goe on with truth; THURSDAY.  Feb.  19. And assure you that three of the Rebels belonging to  Gaunt-house,  were taken napping at their  Trade (Plunder)  by 3 of our  Oxford  Gentry, and committed Tuesday night to the  Marshalls  care; all well clad, well armed, well lyned, yet had nothing taken from them but their Armour; it was to let them know, they met with better and honester men then themselves: These three were no good  Omen  to the 500 that came to Plunder  Wood-stock  on Tuseday night last, the manner thus: Towarde the evening, (at day they durst not have been so bold) they came to the towne with  White Colours   in their hatt ; but the  Centry,  knowing full well that often times the  black Divell,  transformes himselfe into an  Angell of light,  would not be fool'd or frighted from his duty, and therefore gave the  Alarme,  but before the Gentlemen in the Garrison could march up, the Rebels got into the towne, and out of severall stables tooke ten Horses, eight of which being past service were destined to the  Dogges,  (much good may they do them) and out of severall houses got some Plunder  but they did not make hast enough away; for by our Musquets and a Drake, they were so well payed, that a  Lievtenant Colonell,  and nine others lay in the dirt, and promised upon their death never to beare Armes againe, against a gratious King, five others being taken prisoners, and five Horses of service exchang'd for our two, the rest took their flight, whether as yet we heare not; it may be to  Banbury  for as much more the loyall Governour there, whith his choyce and tryed Infantry, no more fearing the Rebels under Colonell  Whaley,  and all those Additionalls shall come to him, then they did Colonell  Nathaniell Fines  the last year; only the mischiefe is, he hath no Father  Lord Say,  to send his weeping Letters to, for Recruites; which in very good time he may need as much as    the Rebels doe in South- Wales,  where the  Lord Charles   goes on successefully, and so will, with God's blessing, in spight of opposition, untill that Country be reduced; which promises very faire: if you will not beleeve our report, you will yet give some credit to an Expresse, which as it came to our hands this day  FRIDAY.  Febr.  20. We shall communicate without alteration of word or syllable; it is a confirmation of our last, and somewhat more: If you please read it. My Lord, I Cannot omit to give your Lordship an accompt of the proceedings in these parts, and how advantagions it is like to be to His Majesties Service: the taking of  Carlion  with 140 Prisoners, besides those killed and drowned, which were not few in number, I gave your Lordship knowledge in my Letter by a Servant of Sir—But since the Forces ingaged themselves upon  Newport,  Where 600 good men killed neare  00  tooke 120 Prisoners, with the towne, and a  Ammunition and Arms, without the losse of one man, only we had some 20 men searched by firing of three Barrells of Powder, our men falling so violently on their maine Guard, where their Ammunition   And upon this good successe the well affected of  Glamo gan-shire  have taken the advantage of the time, Mr—of  Weany,  and Sir—being their Cheifes to raise an Army of 3000 men, have taken  Swan ie,  and all the Shipping there, with much Ammunition and Armes; are now before  Cardiffe,  have cut off their water, blocked it up, and if they have not reliefe from Sea, doubt not but to be maisters of it within these few dayes: My Lords Forces are at  Newport  and  Carlion,  and have dayly correspondence with them, and are ready upon all occasions to joyne: The Country in both Counties commeth into my Lord with a pretty deale of forwardnesse, and march, and doe duetie.  There is somewhat more, and of more concernment in the Expresse, and will it may be, becommunicated hereafter: In the mean time, we thought fit to give the Rebels thus much to chew upon, and our friends as much to cheare themselves withall. M.  Lillye  guest very unhappyly in his  Februaries Observations  [me thinks we are sorrowfull on a suddain. ] And so did his neighbour of the  Starry Region   hn Booker,  in his Poetry upon this month. Venus and Saturne in Conjunction, Will much displease, who e're it lights upon. Pray  Coelicus  tell us, did this Conjunction light upon these in  South-Wales,  or upon those in the  West  of  England   For you will not deny but those of Gallantry in  Corfe-Castle  did light upon those  Horse that lye so close before  Corse-Castle,  that if other occasions ca  them not off  it is hoped they will take the Castle in short time,  saies the  Perfect Occuryences  Number 7. 1646. Thursday, Feb.  1 . If he had but added,  or in short time the Castle would take them,  he had spoke truth in spight of his teeth; For of one whole Troop consisting of    but six escaped, the rest both men and horse are kill'd and taken  or did this Conjunction light upon them before  Dunstar-Castle, which the Lord   oring   Horse   saies the  Moderate Intelligenter,  (if we had no other authority, we will acknowledge at this time to be true)  have releived and   therein 25 Cowes, 40 Sheep  and four Barrells of Powder, and spoyled our Mine in their retreat:  Yes, so they did, and in stead of  sing 53 as he saies after,  Tuesday  Feb.  10. they have took 35. or did this Conjunction light upon them at   The  Moderate Intelligencer, Saturday  Febr.  7   ells us   It is taken by the Lord Loughborough;  which we are willing to beleive from him, but do not yet perswade any man to beleive it from us; But this we would have you beleive from us, that  Captaine Dayrell  went with a commanded party of   Horse, to  Stony-Stratford   and there met with a party of  Newport-Pagnell  Horse, took six prisoners, ten Horses, so   that foure went home on foot, and three horses laden with very good provisions, but are better disposed of at  Borstall  amongst honest men, then elswhere. Howsoever it lighted upon some of them in those places before mentioned, and in a smaller, but very fine proportion, somewhere else, as SATURDAY.  Febr.  21. We receive it this day; that upon  Friday Febr. 20. Captaine Maisters  (who Commands Colonell  Walters  Troop) understanding that a party of the Enemies were abroad plundering the Market folkes, took with him a party of fourteen, and comming too late at the place where they had been, he took eight of his fourteen and advanced to a place called  Balden,  where he met with Eleven Rebels, and their Companions,  six plundred Calves,  so that in the whole there were 17  Heads,  whom he no sooner charges, but they flye, and put themselves into two Boates at  Sandford,  to ferry for  Abingdon;  the Captaine and his men; loth to go back again with nothing, swomme their Horses, recovered one of their Boats, and therein took three of the men prisoners with their horses and Arms, and brought them into  Oxford;  The  Calves  indeed were had safe to  Abingdon;  and there we leave them. And now desire the world to take notice of the cold zeale of the reformers at  Westminster;  before whom was brought one  Paul Best,  and accused of some  Peccadillo's, Blasphemie and Heresie,  denying the Trinity of  Persons,  and the  Deity of Christ,  and of the  holy Ghost: The Perfect Diurnall  told us a fortnight since, and more, that they had committed him close Prisoner, but yet we hear not of any other punishment: we hope they will deal otherwise with him, then Mr  Richard Browne  dealt with a  Blasphemer  at  Abingdon,  one  Haunch  by name, who by this  Blasphemie  became M.  Brownes  Favorite;  when the prisoners are called before Generall  Brown,  he places some on his right hand like  Sheep,  and some on his left hand like  Goats; I dare not repeat more of it; nor doe I say more of it then to tell M.  Richard,  that his great  Sire  for such a kind of sinne was devoured by  Lice:  it may be he is destined to another end. FINIS.